Classical physics is generally concerned with matter and energy on the normal scale of observation, while much of modern physics is concerned with the behavior of matter and energy under extreme conditions or on a very large or very small scale. For example, atomic and nuclear physics studies matter on the smallest scale at which chemical elements can be identified. The physics of elementary particles is on an even smaller scale since it is concerned with the most basic units of matter; this branch of physics is also known as high-energy physics because of the extremely high energies necessary to produce many types of particles in particle accelerators. On this scale, ordinary, commonsense notions of space, time, matter, and energy are no longer valid.

The two chief theories of modern physics present a different picture of the concepts of space, time, and matter from that presented by classical physics. Classical mechanics approximates nature as continuous, while quantum theory is concerned with the discrete nature of many phenomena at the atomic and subatomic level and with the complementary aspects of particles and waves in the description of such phenomena. The theory of relativity is concerned with the description of phenomena that take place in a frame of reference that is in motion with respect to an observer; the special theory of relativity is concerned with relative uniform motion in a straight line and the general theory of relativity with accelerated motion and its connection with gravitation. Both quantum theory and the theory of relativity find applications in all areas of modern physics.
While physics aims to discover universal laws, its theories lie in explicit domains of applicability. Loosely speaking, the laws of classical physics accurately describe systems whose important length scales are greater than the atomic scale and whose motions are much slower than the speed of light. Outside of this domain, observations do not match predictions provided by classical mechanics. Albert Einstein contributed the framework of special relativity, which replaced notions of absolute time and space with spacetime and allowed an accurate description of systems whose components have speeds approaching the speed of light. Max Planck, Erwin Schrödinger, and others introduced quantum mechanics, a probabilistic notion of particles and interactions that allowed an accurate description of atomic and subatomic scales. Later, quantum field theory unified quantum mechanics and special relativity. General relativity allowed for a dynamical, curved spacetime, with which highly massive systems and the large-scale structure of the universe can be well-described. General relativity has not yet been unified with the other fundamental descriptions; several candidate theories of quantum gravity are being developed.
Applied physics is a general term for physics research which is intended for a particular use. An applied physics curriculum usually contains a few classes in an applied discipline, like geology or electrical engineering. It usually differs from engineering in that an applied physicist may not be designing something in particular, but rather is using physics or conducting physics research with the aim of developing new technologies or solving a problem.

The approach is similar to that of applied mathematics. Applied physicists use physics in scientific research. For instance, people working on accelerator physics might seek to build better particle detectors for research in theoretical physics.

Physics is used heavily in engineering. For example, statics, a subfield of mechanics, is used in the building of bridges and other static structures. The understanding and use of acoustics results in sound control and better concert halls; similarly, the use of optics creates better optical devices. An understanding of physics makes for more realistic flight simulators, video games, and movies, and is often critical in forensic investigations.

With the standard consensus that the laws of physics are universal and do not change with time, physics can be used to study things that would ordinarily be mired in uncertainty. For example, in the study of the origin of the earth, one can reasonably model earth's mass, temperature, and rate of rotation, as a function of time allowing one to extrapolate forward or backward in time and so predict future or prior events. It also allows for simulations in engineering which drastically speed up the development of a new technology.

But there is also considerable interdisciplinarity in the physicist's methods, so many other important fields are influenced by physics (e.g., the fields of econophysics and sociophysics)

Physicists who work at the interplay of theory and experiment are called phenomenologists, who study complex phenomena observed in experiment and work to relate them to a fundamental theory.

Theoretical physics has historically taken inspiration from philosophy; electromagnetism was unified this way.[d] Beyond the known universe, the field of theoretical physics also deals with hypothetical issues,[e] such as parallel universes, a multiverse, and higher dimensions. Theorists invoke these ideas in hopes of solving particular problems with existing theories. They then explore the consequences of these ideas and work toward making testable predictions.

Experimental physics expands, and is expanded by, engineering and technology. Experimental physicists involved in basic research design and perform experiments with equipment such as particle accelerators and lasers, whereas those involved in applied research often work in industry developing technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transistors. Feynman has noted that experimentalists may seek areas which are not well-explored by theorists.[
Physics covers a wide range of phenomena, from elementary particles (such as quarks, neutrinos, and electrons) to the largest superclusters of galaxies. Included in these phenomena are the most basic objects composing all other things. Therefore, physics is sometimes called the "fundamental science".Physics aims to describe the various phenomena that occur in nature in terms of simpler phenomena. Thus, physics aims to both connect the things observable to humans to root causes, and then connect these causes together.

For example, the ancient Chinese observed that certain rocks (lodestone and magnetite) were attracted to one another by an invisible force. This effect was later called magnetism, which was first rigorously studied in the 17th century. But even before the Chinese discovered magnetism, the ancient Greeks knew of other objects such as amber, that when rubbed with fur would cause a similar invisible attraction between the two.[53] This was also first studied rigorously in the 17th century and came to be called electricity. Thus, physics had come to understand two observations of nature in terms of some root cause (electricity and magnetism). However, further work in the 19th century revealed that these two forces were just two different aspects of one force—electromagnetism. This process of "unifying" forces continues today, and electromagnetism and the weak nuclear force are now considered to be two aspects of the electroweak interaction. Physics hopes to find an ultimate reason (Theory of Everything) for why nature is as it is (see section Current research below for more information).
In physics, relativistic mechanics refers to mechanics compatible with special relativity (SR) and general relativity (GR). It provides a non-quantum mechanical description of a system of particles, or of a fluid, in cases where the velocities of moving objects are comparable to the speed of light c. As a result, classical mechanics is extended correctly to particles traveling at high velocities and energies, and provides a consistent inclusion of electromagnetism with the mechanics of particles. This was not possible in Galilean relativity, where it would be permitted for particles and light to travel at any speed, including faster than light. The foundations of relativistic mechanics are the postulates of special relativity and general relativity. The unification of SR with quantum mechanics is relativistic quantum mechanics, while attempts for that of GR is quantum gravity, an unsolved problem in physics.

As with classical mechanics, the subject can be divided into "kinematics"; the description of motion by specifying positions, velocities and accelerations, and "dynamics"; a full description by considering energies, momenta, and angular momenta and their conservation laws, and forces acting on particles or exerted by particles. There is however a subtlety; what appears to be "moving" and what is "at rest"—which is termed by "statics" in classical mechanics—depends on the relative motion of observers who measure in frames of reference.

Although some definitions and concepts from classical mechanics do carry over to SR, such as force as the time derivative of momentum (Newton's second law), the work done by a particle as the line integral of force exerted on the particle along a path, and power as the time derivative of work done, there are a number of significant modifications to the remaining definitions and formulae. SR states that motion is relative and the laws of physics are the same for all experimenters irrespective of their inertial reference frames. In addition to modifying notions of space and time, SR forces one to reconsider the concepts of mass, momentum, and energy all of which are important constructs in Newtonian mechanics. SR shows that these concepts are all different aspects of the same physical quantity in much the same way that it shows space and time to be interrelated. Consequently, another modification is the concept of the center of mass of a system, which is straightforward to define in classical mechanics but much less obvious in relativity - see relativistic center of mass for details.

The equations become more complicated in the more familiar three-dimensional vector calculus formalism, due to the nonlinearity in the Lorentz factor, which accurately accounts for relativistic velocity dependence and the speed limit of all particles and fields. However, they have a simpler and elegant form in four-dimensional spacetime, which includes flat Minkowski space (SR) and curved spacetime (GR), because three-dimensional vectors derived from space and scalars derived from time can be collected into four vectors, or four-dimensional tensors. However, the six component angular momentum tensor is sometimes called a bivector because in the 3D viewpoint it is two vectors (one of these, the conventional angular momentum, being an axial vector).
abundances of elements
What portion of atomic matter in the universe is made up of hydrogen atoms? What fraction takes the form of helium, and how abundant are the other chemical elements? Questions like these are interesting in the context of relativity theory because the relativistic big bang models predict how many nuclei of light elements (mainly deuterium, helium, lithium) should have formed in the early universe during the phase known as Big Bang Nucleosynthesis. A brief account of this phase can be found in the spotlight text Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and change provides more information about the physical processes involved.

Measuring the abundances for these elements and subtracting the estimate for how many such nuclei formed inside stars (stellar nucleosynthesis) makes for an important test of this prediction and thus of the big bang models themselves. More information is provided by the spotlight text Elements of the past.

  acceleration
Every change of velocity with time is an acceleration.

This definition is slightly different from our everyday usage of the word. Ordinarily, we talk of an object accelerating when it becomes faster and faster. The physics definition covers two more situations. An object that decelerates, becomes slower, thus changes its velocity and, in the physics sense, undergoes a (negative) acceleration. Also, in physics, velocity is not the same as speed. A constant velocity implies not only constant speed, but also a constant direction of movement. Once the direction changes, so does the velocity - the change in velocity is associated with the change in the direction of movement. Thus, in the physics sense, even a car going around a curve of the road at constant speed undergoes acceleration.

  accretion
When gas, dust or other kinds of matter fall towards a compact object (such as a black hole or a neutron star), a disk of infalling matter forms around the central object called the accretion disk.

The energy that matter gains in its fall is transformed into heat energy of the disk matter. Consequently, accretion disks are, as a rule, extremely hot. Their thermal radiation they emit is an important tool for indirect observation of neutron stars and black hole.

Within the disk, matter spirals around and around, coming closer and closer to the central object until at last it falls onto its surface (or, in the case of a black hole, through its event horizon).

  action-at-a-distance
Forces acting from one location to another without the need for any material connection, and without any delay - for instance, the Newtonian gravitational force with which even distant bodies in empty space can exert influence on each other.

  amplitude
For a physical quantity that changes periodically, the maximal value reached in the course of one period. The simplest example is a sine oscillation as shown here:

 

Sine curve, with a horizontal line at the same height as the maximum of the sine indicating the amplitude

Over time (plotted from left to right), the sine curve oscillates between its minimum and its maximum values.

Depending on the nature of the oscillation or wave, the amplitude will have different meanings. For a pendulum swinging back and forth, the amplitude is the maximum angle between the vertical direction and the pendulum string. For an electromagnetic wave, the amplitude is the maximal value of the electric field or equivalently (since the two maxima are related) the maximum of the magnetic field. For a (weak) gravitational wave, the amplitude is a direct measure of the changes in distance caused by the wave - as a simple gravitational wave of amplitude A passes, there are two directions in which distances are alternately stretched by up to a factor (1+A/2) and compressed by a factor (1-A/2).

The amplitude can change over time. For instance, for an ordinary pendulum, air friction will slow the pendulum bob down, and for each period - for each time the pendulum bob travels back and forth - the amplitude will be less than for the previous period. For a wave, the amplitude will also in general vary with location. Typically, the amplitude of a wave will decrease with the distance from the wave's source.

  angular momentum
A conserved physical quantity associated with the rotation of an object.

In classical physics, the contribution of each part of a body to the body's total angular momentum is the part's mass times its distance from the axis of rotation times the part's velocity due to the rotation.

More information can be found in the spotlight text What figure-skaters, planets, and neutron stars have in common.

In the context of general relativity, angular momentum is an interesting quantity in the physics of black holes. Some more information about this can be found in the spotlight text How many kinds of black hole are there?

  anti-particle
As a general rule, theories uniting special relativity and quantum theory predict the existence of a species of anti-particle for every species of particle. For instance, if such a theory contains electrons, then it also contains their anti-particles, called positrons, for protons, there are anti-protons, and so on.

It is a universal feature of anti-particles that they have the same mass as corresponding particles, and equal, but opposite charges; for examples, electrons and positrons have the same mass, but the electrons carry negative electric charge, whereas positrons carry the exact same amount of positive electric charge. For particles that carry no charges of any kind, particles and anti-particles are identical.

  aphelion
For a planet or other heavenly body orbiting the sun on an elliptic orbit, that point of the orbit farthest from the sun. The point closest to the sun is the perihelion. In the context of general relativity, aphelion and perihelion are of great interest as that theory predicts a slight motion of these points around the sun, cf. (relativistic) perihelion shift.

  arcminute
Synonyms: minute of arc, second of arc. Subdivisions of an angle, analogous to subdivisions of time: Sixty arcseconds correspond to one arcminute; sixty arcminutes (or 3600 arcseconds) correspond to one degree. A right angle has 90 degrees, or 5400 arcminutes, or 324000 arcseconds.

To denote fractions of these units, a prefix is added in the usual way - for instance, one thousandth of a second of arc is a millisecond of arc.

  atom
All matter we encounter in everyday life consists of smallest units called atoms - the air we breath consists of a wildly careening crowd of little groups of atoms, my computer's keyboard of a tangle of atom chains, the metal surface it rests on is a crystal lattice of atoms. All the variety of matter consists of less than hundred species of atoms (in other words: less than a hundred different chemical elements).

Every atom consists of an nucleus surrounded by a cloud of electrons. Nearly all of the atom's mass is concentrated in its nucleus, while the structure of the electron cloud determines how the atom can bind to other atoms (in other words: its chemical properties). Every chemical element can be defined via a characteristic number of protons in its nucleus. Atoms that have lost some of their usual number of electrons are called ions. Atoms are extremely small (typical diameters are in the region of tenths of a billionth of a metre = 10-10 metres), and to describe their properties and behaviour, one has to resort to quantum theory.

  big bang
The big bang models are the foundation of modern cosmology. Firmly grounded in Einstein's theory of general relativity, they describe a universe that began in a very hot initial state and has expanded (and cooled down) ever since. They make precise predictions about nucleosynthesis in the early universe, the existence and properties of the cosmic background radiation, and the distribution of distant galaxies in the cosmos, which have been confirmed by astronomical observation.

The word "big bang" has two different meanings. In a strict sense, the big bang is a space-time singularity, a state of infinite density - the initial state the big bang models predict for our universe. In a more general sense, the term is applied to the earliest cosmic eras, in which the universe was exceedingly hot and dense. Further information about these two meanings and why it is important to distinguish between them can be found in the spotlight text A tale of two big bangs.

The basic features of the big bang models are reviewed in the chapter Cosmology of Elementary Einstein.

Selected aspects of cosmology are described in the category Cosmology of our Spotlights on relativity.

  Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
Synonym: primordial nucleosynthesis. The formation of complicated nuclei from constitutents such as protons and neutrons in the early universe. According to the big bang models, the early universe was filled with a particle soup of protons and neutrons. At cosmic times between a few seconds and a few minutes, nuclear reactions produced the first light elements, mainly nuclei of deuterium, different varieties of helium and lithium.

A brief account of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be found in the spotlight text Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and change provides more information about the physical processes involved and Elements of the past describes how the predictions of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be tested against astronomical observation.

  binary star
A system consisting of two stars in orbit around each other. From a relativistic point of view, there are binaries that are of special interest, namely those in which at least one of the partners is a neutron star or a black hole. Potentially, such systems are effective sources of gravitational waves.

  binding energy
The energy needed to break up a composite object into its component parts.

More about binding energy, the mass defect it is responsible for and its role in nuclear fission and nuclear fusion can be found in our spotlight topic Is the whole the sum of its parts?

  Birkhoff's theorem
A theorem of general relativity, discovered by J. T. Jebsen (1921) and independently discovered, and named after, George D. Birkhoff (1923): Any spherically symmetric spacetime has the same properties as some region from one of a simple family of spacetimes found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916. More concretely: The spherically symmetric spacetime around any spherically symmetric matter configuration has the same properties as space-time around a Schwarzschild black hole of the appropriate mass.

  BKL conjecture
Conjecture by the Soviet physicists Vladimir Belinskii, Isaak Khalatnikov and Evgeny Lifshitz that, near a singularity, the contribution of matter to gravity becomes negligible compared with the effects of gravity as a source of further gravity (compare the spotlight text The gravity of gravity), and that near a singularity, the variation of the gravitational field from one location to the next can be neglected - what is much more important is the way gravity changes over time. Further information about this can be found in the spotlight text Of singularities and breadmaking.

  black hole
Region of space in which a sufficient amount of mass is concentrated to form a gravitational prison - a region into which matter or light can enter from the outside, but from which nothing that has ever fallen in can ever leave.

Basic informations about this basic concept of Einstein's general theory of relativity can be found in the chapter Black holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.

Selected aspects of the physics of black holes and neutron stars are described in the category Black holes & Co. of our Spotlights on relativity.

In Einstein's theory, black holes are truly black, due to the fact that no radiation or light can ever escape them. Once quantum theory is taken into account, that need no longer be true - on the contrary, it seems as if black holes should emit so-called Hawking radiation. However, for astrophysical black holes (that typically have more or even much more than one solar mass), that radiation would be undetectable if we could transport today's finest sensors into the immediate vicinity of the black hole.

  black hole uniqueness theorems
Theorems proved in the context of general relativity that answer the question: How many different kinds of black holes are there? If that question is restricted to stationary black holes (namely black holes that have settled down and do not change over time), then the answer is: Surprisingly few. Once you know a stationary black hole's mass, angular momentum (roughly speaking, how fast it rotates) and electric charge, its properties are determined completely.

More information can be found in the spotlight text How many different kinds of black hole are there?

  blackbody
Idealized body that is capable of absorbing and emitting all forms of electromagnetic radiation, regardless of their wavelength. The thermal radiation emitted by such a body is governed by a set of especially simple laws, like Planck's radiation law, the Stefan-Boltzmann law and Wien's law.

  blazar
The frequency of a simple light wave is directly related to its colour (cf. spectrum). For the highest possible frequencies, the colour is blue-violet. If the frequency of a light wave is shifted towards higher frequencies (for instance by the doppler shift), that corresponds to a colour shift towards the blue-violet end of the spectrum, and is hence called a blue-shift.

From this, "blue-shift" has come to acquire a more general meaning. It is used to denote any shift towards higher frequencies, even for types of electromagnetic radiation where the frequencies do not correspond to any visible colour, and more generally still, for other types of waves as well (for instance for gravitational waves).

  brane
In string theory: An object that is the analogue of a two-dimensional membrane embedded in three-dimensional space - an entity with a certain number of dimensions (one-brane, two-brane, three-brane...) embedded in the higher-dimensional space of string theory. A one-brane or 1-brane has one spatial dimension, a two-brane has two, and so on.
  brane world
The notion that our world with its three dimensions of space is a three-brane embedded in a higher-dimensional space, akin to a two-dimensional surface embedded in ordinary three-dimensional space.

More information about this can be found in the spotlight text The embedded universe.

  Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
National laboratory in the United States, located on Long Island, New York. The BNL operates the Relativististic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), a particle accelerator that enables researchers to recreate the state of matter fractions of a second after the big bang. Also, BNL operates accelerators used to produce synchrotron radiation. One of them, the VUV ring, can be seen on the page E=mc2 in the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein.

Brookhaven National Laboratory Website

National Synchrotron Light Source at the Brookhaven National Laboratory

  brown dwarf
A failed star: A gas ball in space that has between one and ten percent solar mass - not enough for the temperature and pressure in its core to reach the values required for the nuclear fusion to start that would transform the gas ball into a shining star.

  causal
In the context of relativity: causality concerns the questions which events can, in principle, cause which other events and which events are two far apart for one to influence the other. In special relativity, nothing, no moving object, no information, no influence can move faster than light. Thus, no event can influence another if the two events happen too far apart for light to travel between from the first event to reach the location of the second event in time. In other words, light propagation determins the causal structure of space-time (cf. light-cone). Models or theories respecting this causal structure are themselves called causal - an example are the relativistic quantum field theories.

In general relativity, the cosmic speed limit light speed is only defined locally: In a side-by-side race, no object, no influence can overtake a light signal. This, too, leads to a causal structure, to strict rules which event can influence which other event. As gravity deflects and delays light signals, matters are more complicated than in special relativity, but it's still true that the causal structure is completely determined by how light propagates in the space-time in question.

  causal sets
Approach to the problem of finding a theory of quantum gravity: In causet models, space-time is composed of elementary building blocks that represent elementary events.

More information about causal sets can be found in the spotlight topic Geometry from order: causal sets.

  celestial mechanics
That discipline in physics (and astronomy) dealing with the laws that govern the motions of heavenly bodies. Originally seen as distinct from the motions of bodies on earth (see Kepler's laws of motion), it has been a sub-discipline of mechanics ever since Newton derived the cosmic laws of motions from more general mechanical laws.

For most astronomical applications, Newtonian, classical mechanics works perfectly well, however, as soon as high-precision measurements or strong gravitational fields come into play, celestial mechanics is governed by laws of relativistic mechanics derived from Einstein's theory of general relativity.

  centrifugal force
An inertial force which an observer in a rotating reference frame needs to introduce in order to explain why nearly all objects in the vicinity appear to undergo acceleration away from the axis of rotation.

  Chandrasekhar mass
Upper bound for the masses of white dwarfs, in other words: for what low-mass stars become when they have used up their nuclear fuel. The first to calculate this upper bound was the Indian astrophysicist Subramanian Chandrasekhar.

The Chandrasekhar mass is 1.4 times as large as the solar_mass. The reason that no white dwarf can have more mass follows from its need to maintain equilibrium between the gravitational force working towards further collapse and the interior pressure of the star acting to prevent collapse. For larger masses, the degeneracy pressure on which a white dwarf's stability depends is overcome, and further collapse ensues.
charge
On the one hand: a measure of the strength of a force (action-at-a-distance) originating from a body, and of how susceptible it is to being influenced by other bodies via the same force. The most famous example is electric charge: Electrically charged bodies act on other electrically charged bodies via an electric force whose strength is proportional to the electric charges of the bodies involved.

It is a characteristic property of charges that they are conserved; they can neither be created from nothing nor simply disappear. For instance, when a positron with electric charge +1 (in suitable units) and an electron with electric charge -1 annihilate to give electromagnetic radiation, overall charge conservation is satisfied: Before the annihilation, the sum of the electric charges was 1+(-1)=0, and afterwards, when there is only uncharged electromagnetic radiation left, it is also zero.

In the context of particle physics, there are more abstract charges not directly connected with forces and interaction, but subject to similar conservation laws.

  chemical evolution
The changes in the abundances of the different chemical elements that have taken place throughout the history of the universe, mainly in the very early universe during the phase called Big Bang Nucleosynthesis and, from a couple of hundred million years later until today, in the interior of stars (stellar nucleosynthesis).

  classical
In physics, the word is used with two meanings. First of all, it denotes physical models or theories that take into account neither the effects of Einstein's theories of relativity nor those of quantum physics, for example classical mechanics. However, it is also used to denote models or theories that are not formulated in the framework of quantum physics; in that sense, general relativity is an example for a classical theory.

  Compton Gamma Ray Observatory
A satellite observatory for astronomical observations of gamma rays operated by NASA from 1991 to 2000. Scientific aims included the study of gamma ray bursts, pulsars, supernovae, and accretion processes around black holes.

CGRO homepage (NASA)

  conic singularity
A particular type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary where spacetime ends) that is not associated with curvature, but instead is the analogue of the pointed tip of a cone.

More information about the different types of singularity can be found in the spotlight text Spacetime singularities.

  conservation laws
Some of the most important quantities in physics are conserved : What they measure can neither be created nor destroyed, and their total sum is constant over time. Such statements of constancy over time are called conservation laws.

The most important conserved quantity is energy. Energy can neither be created from nothing nor simply vanish. If the energy contained in a system increases, it must be because energy has been transported into the system (and there is now less energy outside the system); if the energy decreases, it must be because energy has been transferred into the system (and there is now less energy outside).

Another important class of conserved quantities are charges, for instance electric charge. A further conserved quantity in mechanics is angular momentum; a quantity associated with a body's rotation.

  constancy of the speed of light
One of the basic postulates of special relativity: The speed of light in a vacuum is the same for all observers drifting through gravity-free space (more precisely: for all inertial observers. In particular, its value its independent of an observer's motion relative to the source of the light.
  continuous
Space as we are used to thinking about it is a continuum or, equivalently, continuous space: Between every two points, there always exists an infinity of other points, and every volume can be divided into smaller and smaller parts without ever reaching a limit.
  coordinates
A rule for assigning to each point of a general space (that is to say: of a line segment, a surface, three-dimensional space or higher-dimensional analogues) or space-time a set of numbers for purposes of identification.

Many readers will know two examples from school: In the case of the line of real numbers, every point on the line corresponds to a real number which can be seen as its coordinate. What's important is that these coordinates reflect neighbourly relations: The number 1 lies between the number 0 and the number 2, and so does the point corresponding to it lie between the two points corresponding to 0 and 2. The second example is the usual X-Y-coordinate system (sometimes called Cartesian coordinates), by which every point in a plane can be characterized by two numbers: the first its X coordinate value, the second its Y coordinate value.

The examples reflect an important property of coordinates: To uniquely identify a point in space, one needs as many coordinate values as the space has dimensions.

Of the four coordinates defining an event in space-time, three serve to fix its location in three-dimensional space, while the fourth gives the point in time for the event.

  Coriolis force
An inertial force which an observer in a rotating reference frame needs to introduce in order to explain why certain moving objects appear to undergo acceleration at right angles to their direction of motion.

The Coriolis force plays an important role in meteorology - from the point of view of an observer at rest on the surface of the earth, it explains the deflection of certain wind flows.

  cosmic censorship
Possibly the most disturbing feature of Einstein's general theory of relativity is the existence of singularities - most commonly, regions of spacetime in which density and curvature go to infinity.

Is is quite likely that singularities are artefacts resulting from the fact that Einstein's theory does not take quantum effects into account, and that they will be absent in a more complete theory of quantum gravity. Yet even if you leave aside quantum theory, and stay strictly within the framework of Einstein's theory, it is likely that most singularities are, if not absent, then at least well-concealed:

The hypothesis of cosmic censorship states that, whenever a body collapses so completely as to result in the formation of a singularity, a black hole will be formed so that the singularity will be hidden behind the horizon, and thus completely unobservable for anyone outside the black hole.

At the present time, this hypothesis is unproven. Indeed, there are some counterexamples, but they describe idealized situations which are not likely to tell us anything about the real world. Finding a proof that, for all realistic collapse situations, there is indeed cosmic censorship, is one of the great open problems of general relativity research.

  cosmological constant
In the big bang models, an inherent tendency of space to accelerate or decelerate its expansion. From observations, it seems that our own cosmos has a cosmological constant that leads to a slight acceleration of its expansion.
  cosmological redshift
Consequence of cosmic expansion in the big bang models: the farther away a galaxy, the more strongly shifted towards lower frequencies is the light we receive from it .
  cosmology
That branch of physics and astronomy dealing with the structure and development of the universe as a whole. At the core of modern cosmology are the big bang models based on Einstein's general theory of relativity. Their basic features are reviewed in the chapter Cosmology of Elementary Einstein. In order to describe the very early universe, it will be necessary to take the effects of quantum gravity into account - this gives rise to models of quantum cosmology.

  current
Matter in coordinated, flowing motion - think of water flowing in a pipe. An important example is the electric current associated with moving electric charges. Electric currents are the sources of magnetic fields.

  curvature
For a two-dimensional surface: criterion that allows us to decide whether that surface is a plane, or part of a plane (i.e. a surface on which the usual rules of high school geometry apply), or not. Two possibilities to define the curvature of a plane are the following:

Sum of the angles of a triangle. In a plane, the sum of the three angles in a triangle formed by three straight lines is always 180 degrees. In a more general surface, the sum of the angles of a more general triangle formed by three straightest-possible lines (i.e. geodesics) can be larger or smaller than 180 degrees. The difference (the surplus or deficit), divided by the area of the triangle, is a measure for the curvature of that region of the surface.

Second possibility: the circumference of a circle. In the plane, that circumference is equal to 2 times pi times the circle's radius. On a more general surface, it can be larger or smaller. The difference, divided by the third power of the radius, leads to the same measure for the curvature as the first definition.

Simple examples for curved surfaces are the surface of a sphere (positive curvature, that is to say: sum of the angles in a triangle larger than 180 degrees, circumference of a circle smaller than 2 times pi times radius) and that of a saddle (negative curvature, that is to say: sum of the angles in a triangle smaller than 180 degrees, circumference of a circle larger than 2 times pi times radius).

Curvature cannot only be defined for surfaces, but also for higher-dimensional, more general spaces or space-times. However, the generalized definition is substantially more complicated, and curvature is defined not by a single number, but by a set of numbers (that, together, form the "curvature tensor"). It's basic meaning, however, is the same: it measures the space's deviation from a flat space of the same dimension.

For physics, an important aspect of curvature is its connection with gravity, as described in Einstein's general theory of relativity. Basic information about this can be found in the spotlight text Gravity: From weightlessness to curvature.

  curvature singularity
A type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary where spacetime ends) that is associated with infinitely strong gravity and, hence, infinitely strong spacetime curvature.

Two different varieties of curvature singularity are Ricci- and Weyl singularities.

More information about the different types of singularities can be found in the spotlight text Spacetime singularities.

  dark energy
Comparing astronomical observations with the predictions of the big bang models (which link the properties of matter and the speed of the universe's expansion), it turns out that more than 70 percent of the density of the universe is supplied by what is called dark energy, a type of energy that is associated with empty space itself. Ordinary matter or energy are conserved when the universe expands: If I have 10 hydrogen atoms in a certain region of space, and if that region now expands to twice its initial volume, it will still contain no more than the initial 10 hydrogen atoms, now spread over the larger volume. On the other hand, the amount of dark energy in that region of space doubles in the process, just as the volume, the "amount of space" is twice as large than it was in the beginning.

There's another crucial difference between ordinary energy and dark energy. The gravitational influence of ordinary masses and ordinary energy is attractive - it is aimed at pulling all the contents of the universe closer together. Dark energy, on the other hand, acts to accelerate the universe's expansion. In that way, it is equivalent to a certain type of what is called a cosmological constant.

As yet, nobody knows how (and if) dark energy fits somewhere into our current picture of the fundamental constitutents of the universe, for instance: into the standard model of particle physics or some extension of that model. This makes dark energy one of the greatest mysteries of modern physics.

  deflection of light, relativistic
One of the basic predictions of general relativity is that light is influenced by gravity. For instance, light passing a massive body is slightly deflected. This is the basis for what is called gravitational lensing.

General information about this topic can be found in the spotlight text The gravitational deflection of light, while its connection with one of the fundamental principles of general relativity is examined in The equivalence principle and the deflection of light.

  degeneracy pressure
For a gas made up of electrons, quantum effects become important. Roughly, it is strictly forbidden for two electrons to be present at the same location (this is called the Pauli exclusion principle), and if anyone attempts to concentrate electrons in a small volume of space, they will start to flit back and forth madly (cf. Heisenberg's uncertainty principle). Just like with regular gases, this flitting back and forth leads to pressure, in this case to what is called degeneracy pressure.

For instance, it is this kind of electron degeneracy pressure that stabilizes a white dwarf, preventing further collapse.

Degeneracy pressure is not only possible for electrons, but for a whole class of quantum particles, namely for all fermions (for example for neutrons or protons.

  density
In a stricter sense synonymous with "mass density": The average density of matter in a region of space is the total mass of all matter contained in that region, divided by the region's volume.

More generally, density can refer to other physical quanti ties as well. The energy density, for instance, is the total sum of energy localized in a region divided by that region's volume.

  deuterium
Variant of the chemical element hydrogen where the atomic nucleus consists not of a single proton, but of a proton and a neutron.

In the context of general relativity, it is of interest as one of the species of light atomic nuclei that formed in the early universe during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis.

  Deutsches Elektronensynchrotron (DESY)
Literally "German electron synchrotron" (a synchrotron being a type of particle accelerator). German research centre for particle physics, founded in 1959 and located in Hamburg in Northern Germany. Site of the particle accelerator HERA, among others.

DESY website

  diffusion
If we put a drop of ink into clear water, then even without stirring, the ink will slowly spread throughout the water. Behind this is the motion of the ink molecules associated with the temperature of the system. The motion of each molecule is purely random, but eventually the sum of many random steps will carry a sizeable number of the molecules far away from the location where we have put the ink drop in. Processes like this where random motions lead to a spreading-out of an ensemble of molecules or other entities are called diffusion.

  dimension
The number of independent directions within a set of points, alternatively: the number of coordinates needed to give each point a unique name. This is rather abstract - time for some examples:

A line is one-dimensional. There's only one direction to go on the line (the opposite direction isn't counted extra): Back-forth. A single number is sufficient to define a point of the line. For instance, on a motorway, given the statement "the accident happened 4 kilometres from the beginning of the I95 (or M1, or whatever)" is sufficient information for the rescue workers to know exactly where to go.

Surfaces are two-dimensional, as there are two independent directions: back-forth and left-right, say. On the earth's surface, the two coordinate numbers geographical longitude and latitude uniquely define each location.

The space that surrounds us is three-dimensional. There are three independent directions, say back-forth, left-right and up-down. In order to define a location in space, one needs to specify three numbers - for instance, two to specify where a house is located on the earth's surface (latitude/longitude, see above) and one floor number (or, more precisely, the height above the earth's surface).

Adding time to the three space coordinates (a must for defining an appointment - where and when?), the result is four-dimensional space-time. In order to define an event in space-time, one needs to give four numbers: three of them determine where in space the event happens, the fourth gives the time where it happens.

According to some of the models that have been studied as candidates for a theory of guantum gravity, our world should have even more space dimensions than the usual three. Some information about these extra dimensions can be found in the spotlight topics  "Extra dimensions, and how to hide them", "Hunting for extra dimensions" and Extra dimensions and simplicity.

  Dirac equation
Equation regulating the behaviour of relativistic quantum particles that have a spin of 1/2, for instance electrons. It was first formulated by Paul Dirac in 1928 and led directly to his successful prediction of the existence of the first species of anti-particle, the positron.

  Doppler effect
Effect named after the Austrian scientist Christian Doppler concerning the emission of waves by moving sources. Consider a wave-source (for instance, a device that sends out sound-waves or light-waves). Also consider two observers A and B, with observer A moving relative to the source, while observer B is at rest relative to it. When a source that moves relative to an observer emits a wave, the frequency measured by this observer is different from what a measuring instrument would record that is at rest relative to the source: If source and observer approach each other, the observer measures a higher frequency, if they move away from each other, a lower frequency.

In everyday life, the Doppler effect is readily apparent when we listen to sound waves from moving sources. If a police car or fire truck with blaring horns first races towards us, then passes us and races away, the characteristic horn sounds change dramatically in pitch the moment the car passes us. This is because, at first, the car is moving towards us, and there is a Doppler shift towards higher pitch compared with a listener in the car. From the moment the car passes us, it becomes a source that moves away from us, with all sounds being shifted to lower pitch.

In the context of relativity, the most important Doppler effect is that for light waves. In this context, a shift towards higher frequencies is called blueshift, one to lower frequencies redshift.

  Earth
Our very own planet in the solar system - the third planet from the sun. The earth has a mass of about 6 billion billion (in exponential notation, 6·1024) kilograms.
  Einstein Papers Project
Project at the California Institute of Technology which is dedicated to publish a full and annotated edition of Einstein's writings and correspondence (the Collected Papers of Albert Einstein).

Einstein Papers Project webpages
Online archive of Einstein's writings

  Einstein's equation
Einstein's equations are the cornerstone of his general theory of relativity. They describe how the distortions of space-time are connected with the properties (mass, energy, pressure...) of whatever matter is present.

Using a compact version of mathematical language, Einstein's equations, a whole system of equations, can be written in an abbreviated way so that they appear to form a single equation. That's why, sometimes, they are called "Einstein's equation" in the singular.

An elementary description of general relativity and Einstein's equations is given in the chapter general relativity of Elementary Einstein.

Document Actions
electric charge
The charge associated with electromagnetism: a property of objects that determines the strength of the electric force with which they act on other charged objects, and the strength of electric forces by which other such objects act on them. Moving electric charges produce a magnetic force, and are influenced by such forces.

  electric field
The electric force is a force by which electric charges act on each other; the electric field is the associated field.

Electric fields cannot be understood separate from magnetic fields - their complete description is only possible within the more general context of electromagnetism.

In the simplest case, namely in situations that do not change over time, the electric force is the so-called electrostatic force.

  electromagnetic radiation
Electromagnetic influences (in the language of physics: electric and magnetic field) which, even with no electric charges present, are locked in a state of mutual excitation so that they form a waves that propagate through space.

As this wave transports energy, it is, by the usual physics definition, a form of radiation, called electromagnetic radiation.

Depending on frequency, there are special names for different types of electromagnetic radiation; going from lower to higher frequencies: radio waves, microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, X-rays and gamma rays.

In the context of quantum theory, it turns out that electromagnetic radiation consists of tiny energy packets, called light particles or photons.

  electromagnetism
Electromagnetism is the totality of all phenomena associated with the presence of electric charges, such as the electric force, magnetic force or electromagnetic waves. The basic laws of electromagnetism are Maxwell's equation.

In the context of special relativity it becomes clear that electric and magnetic forces are relative - which one of them is active in a given situation depends on the observer. Say that, from the point of view of one observer, the attractive force between an electric conductor and a moving charged particle is purely electric in nature - nevertheless, for a moving observer at rest with respect to that particle, it is purely magnetic. Just as, in special relativity, it makes sense to talk of space-time as a whole, seeing that it depends on the observer how that space-time is then split into space and time, it makes sense to talk collectively about "the electromagnetic force", leaving it to the different observers to split this electromagnetic force into electric or magnetic parts.

  electron
Low-mass elementary particle with negative electric charge.

The atoms that are the constituents of everyday matter each consists of a nucleus surrounded by a shell of electrons.

  electron volt
Standard unit of energy in particle physics. One electron volt is the energy gained by an electron that is being accelerated by an electric potential difference ("electric voltage") of 1 volt. One electron volt, in short: 1 eV is equivalent to 1.602176·10-19 Joule (the Joule being the energy unit of the SI system of units).

Multiples of eV that are commonly used are

 

kilo-electronvolt:	1 keV	= 1000 eV	
Mega-electronvolt:	1 MeV	= 1,000,000 eV	=106 eV
Giga-electronvolt:	1 GeV	= 1,000,000,000 eV	=109 eV.
Tera-electronvolt:	1 TeV	= 1,000,000,000,000 eV	=1012 eV.
Making use of the equivalence between mass and energy, eV/c2 is commonly used as a unit for particle masses, with c the speed of light. As it is usual in particle physics to use a system of units in which light speed is equal to one, c=1, mass values are often simply given in eV, without explicitly mentioning the factor c2.

The energy that is necessary to remove an electron from an atom is typically in the range of between a few and a few dozen eV. Typical energies of x-ray photons are in the keV range. The mass of an electron is 511 keV, that of a proton 938 MeV. Each proton in the proton beams that will be brought into head-on collision in the Large Hadron Collider, the particle accelerator currently under construction at the CERN laboratory, will have an energy of about 7 TeV.

As the temperature is a measure of the average energy with which each component participates in a system's disordered thermal motion, it can be measured in eV as well, where 1 eV corresponds to 11,604 Kelvin.

  electrostatic force
An action-at-a-distance-force that acts between electrically charged bodies merely because of the fact they carry electric charge.
  element, chemical
A substance that cannot decomposed into more elementary constitutent substances by the methods of chemistry. From the point of view of physics, there corresponds to every chemical element a species of atom which can be defined uniquely by the number of protons in its atomic nuclei (for example: nuclei with a single proton define the element hydrogen, two protons define helium, three Lithium, 26 iron and 92 uranium).

  eLISA
Planned interferometric gravitational wave detector: three satellites that have been positioned to form a triangle, each side 1 million kilometre long; a space-based observatory for gravitational waves. Project of the European space agency ESA; scientific development ist led by the Albert Einstein Institute. The start is planned for 2022.

eLISA website

  ellipse
A geometrical figure. Choose a plane and, within this plane, two different points (each is called a focus of the ellipse). Also, choose a specific distance value larger or equal to the distance between the two chosen points. The ellipse is the collection of all the points in the plane for which the following holds true: If we measure the distance of such a point to the first focus and the distance to the second focus, and if we add up the two values, then the result is the distance value chosen in advance.

Special cases of an ellipse are a circle (in this special case, both focus points are at the same location) and a straight line joining the two focal points (in this special case, the specific distance chosen is equal to the distance between the two focal points).

As far as gravity is concerned, ellipses are of interest as the orbit of a lonely planet aroudn a central star is an ellipse, according to Newton's theory of gravity.

  energy
Physical quantity with the special property that, in physical processes, energy is neither destroyed nor created, simply transformed from one form of energy to another. Some of the different forms of energy that are defined separately are kinetic energy, thermal energy and the energy carried by electromagnetic radiation.

Processes that transform one form of energy into another take place in all machines we use in everyday life, from the engine of a subway train (electrical energy into kinetic energy of the train) to an electric blanket (electrical energy into thermal energy).

One important consequence of special relativity is that energy and mass are completely equivalent - two different ways to define what is, on closer inspection, one and the same physical quantity. See the keyword equivalence between mass and energy.

  equivalence between mass and energy
Already in special relativity, it turns out that (relativistic) mass and energy are really no more than two different ways of looking at one and the same physical quantity. To every form of energy, there corresponds a mass - if you heat a body up, increasing its thermal energy, you automatically increase its mass. On the other hand, simply because of the mass of its constituent particles, every chunk of matter contains lots and lots of energy. In situations like the annihilation of particles in contact with their anti-particles, resulting in electromagnetic radiation, this matter-energy can be transformed completely into more ordinary types of energy.

The formula relating a mass to the equivalent energy is Einstein's famous

E=mc2 ("E equals m-c-squared")
Here E is the energy, m the corresponding relativistic mass and the constant c the speed of light.

  equivalence principle
One of the postulates at the basis of general relativity: A freely-falling observer in a gravitational field does not feel gravity. More precisely: In a small region of space around an observer in free fall in a gravitational field, the laws of physics are approximately the same as without gravitation (i.e. in special relativity) - at least for a time-limited observation period.

This is sometimes called Einstein's equivalence principle, which includes a more restricted version called the weak equivalence principle, namely that, in a gravitational field, objects which are at the same location are subject to the same gravitationalacceleration - they fall at the same rate ("universality of free fall").

More information about the equivalence principle can be found in the spotlight topic The elevator, the rocket, and gravity: the equivalence principle, while the path from there to Einstein's geometric gravity is traced in Gravity: From weightlessness to curvature.

  error (measurement)
No measurement of a physical quantity is perfectly exact - all measurements have a certain resolution or error. In particular, in measuring a physical quantity there will be a myriad of tiny disturbances (such as fluctuations in the electronic circuits used, atmospheric fluctuations in the observation of a star). Due to these disturbances, repeated measurements will sometimes give a result that is a tad too high, at other times one that is a tad too low. Such unsystematic disturbances can be described with the help of mathematical statistics. In particular, the following holds true: If the same type of measurement is repeated sufficiently often, then the results can be used to estimate both the true value of the measured quantity (the average value of the measurements) and a measure for the accuracy of the measurement (the "standard error", also called "measurement error" or "accuracy").

In publishing the results of measurements, it is usual to give for each result both the best approximation to the true value and an estimate of the accuracy of that approximation. Typically, a result will be written in a form such as ?=0.99983 ± 0.00045, the translation of which is: the best estimate for the quantity ? that results from the measurements is 0.99983, and the combined measurements have the accuracy 0.00045. Alternatively, the same result might be written as ? =0,99983(45), where the digits in parantheses (here 4 and 5) indicate the accuracy of the last digits of the result itself (here 8 and 3).

The error or accuracy is an estimate of the difference between the measurement result and the true value. One widely used convention (called "two sigma") is to use an accuracy with the following meaning: Consider a measurement of some physical quantity that gives an estimate X and an accuracy Y. Then the probability that the true value of that quantity lies somewhere between X-Y and X+Y is 95.5 percent. With another convention ("one sigma"), the probability is only about 68 percent (but in that case, there is a probability of 95.5 percent for the true value to lie between X-2Y and X+2Y). Often, estimates for systematic errors are included in the stated error as well (systematic errors do not manifest themselves in random fluctuations around the true value, but in systematic deviations - for instance, the measured value might systematically tend to be higher than the true value).

  Euclidean
In a stricter sense: Euclidean geometry is the standard geometry taught in school (synonym: plane geometry). In a more general sense: Euclidean geometry is the generalization of this geometry to include three-dimensional space and even higher-dimensional spaces. The three-dimensional space we are used to in everyday life is called Euclidean space. Quite generally, spaces with three or another number of dimensions and Euclidean geometry are called flat.

  European Southern Observatory
A cooperative effort of 10 member states of the European union, ESO operates a number of large-scale telescopes such as the "Very Large Telescope" (VLT) and the "New Technology Telescope" (NTT). The telescopes themselves are located in Chile; the observatory's main office is in Garching, close to Munich in Germany.

ESO website

  European Space Agency
The European Space Agency coordinates the space-faring activities of the European countries. It is a partner in projects such as the Hubble space telescope and the gravitational wave detector LISA.

ESA website

  event
In the context of special or general relativity: Anything that is defined by a single point in time and a single point in space, i.e. something that happens at a definite time at a definite location.

Synonym: spacetime point.

  event horizon
In general relativity: A closed surface that is the boundary of a black hole. Whatever enters through this boundary from the outside can never again leave the inside.

Near-synonym: horizon.

  exact solution
In general relativity, a solution of Einstein's equations is a model universe that follows the law of gravity given by general relativity. If the properties of that model universe can be written down explicitly, for example by expressing the geometry at each point in spacetime with the help of simple functions like fractions, square roots, sine and cosine, the solution is called an exact solution. However, opinions vary somewhat as to what "writing down explicitly" means, so "exact solution", while a useful term, is not a concept that can be defined precisely.

  exponential
A quantity whose rate of growth is proportional to how large it already is is said to show exponential growth. For instance, exponential growth is a model for population growth on a planet with infinite resources: The larger the population, the more children are born and hence the larger the rate of population growth.

In the context of relativity, exponential growth is interesting for cosmology. In the hypothetical inflationary phase of our universe's evolution the cosmos underwent exponential expansion, with the rate of expansion getting ever larger as the universe itself expanded more and more.

  exponential notation
In physics, very large and very small numbers are written with the help of powers of the number ten. For large numbers, 10n with n a positive integer is a 1 with n trailing zeros:

100	=	1	=	Eins
101	=	10	=	ten
102	=	100	=	a hundred
103	=	1000	=	a thousand
106	=	1000000	=	a million
109	=	1000000000	=	a billion
1012	=	1000000000000	=	a trillion
1015	=	1000000000000000	=	a quadrillion
Very small fractions - numbers that differ very little from zero - can be written with the help of 10-n, with n a positive integer (n is, again, the number of zeros):

100	=	1	=	one
10-1	=	0.1	=	one tenth
10-2	=	0.01	=	one hundredth
10-3	=	0.001	=	one thousandth
10-6	=	0.000001	=	one millionths
10-9	=	0.000000001	=	one billionths
10-12	=	0.000000000001	=	one trillionth
10-15	=	0.000000000000001	=	one quadrillionth
 

Numbers that are not powers of ten can be written by factoring out the appropriate powers of ten. For instance,
1748 = 1.748·1000 = 1,748·103,

often written in what is called "scientific notation" as 1.748E3. On the other hand,
0.00041755 = 4.1755·10-4 = 4.1755E-4.

  extra dimension
According to some of the candidate models for a theory of quantum gravity, notably in string theory, our world should have extra dimensions - space dimensions in addition to the three we know from everday life.

More information about extra dimensions, possibilities of observing their effects and their use for building physical models can be found in our section Spotlights on relativity, namely Extra dimensions and how to hide them, The hunt for extra dimensions and Simplicity in higher dimensions.

  false colour
Only a small part of astronomical observations is concerned with visible light, in other words: with electromagnetic radiation visible to the human eye. In order to visualize obervations made at invisible wave-length, such as infra-red light, radio waves or X-rays, the different wave-lengths are mapped to visible colours following some arbitrarily chosen scheme.

Similarly, physical quantities that are not connected with electromagnetic radiation can be mapped to colours; for instance, one can produce images of a star's interior where different colours stand for different densities.

  fermion
"Fermion" is the collective word for all quantum particles with half-integer spin, such as spin 1/2, 3/2 or 5/2.

Among elementary particles, fermions are the matter particles, for example electrons or quarks, while the carrier particles responsible for transmitting the elementary forces between particles belong to a different class - they are bosons.

Quite generally, fermions are subject to the Pauli exclusion principle. Roughly: no two electrons can rest at the same location. A bit more precisely: no two electrons can ever be in the same state. This property is decisive for what we call matter: Only the fact that it is impossible for all electrons of an atom to occupy the lowest energy state close to the atomic nucleus, but that instead the electrons have to spread out and occupy different states leads to the difference between atoms with different numbers of electrons and, in particular, to the fact that different elements have different chemical properties.

  field
The totality of possible force influences acting on test particles in a given region. For instance, the electric forces with which an electrically charged body would act on test particles brought into its vicinity define its electric field, the gravitational forces with which a mass acts on test bodies define its gravitational field.

  flat
A space is called flat if its geometry is the direct generalization of Euclidean geometry, the standard geometry taught in schools. By this definition, the simplest two-dimensional flat space is the plane, and ordinary, everyday three-dimensional space is also flat, to very good approximation.

A space that isn't flat is curved.

  fluid
State of matter in which the constituent atoms and molecules are connected so loosely that the matter cannot maintain any shape without external support: If you place a fluid into a container, its shape will adapt to that of the container (in contrast with a solid body, which will keep its shape). Examples of fluids are gases, liquids and plasma.

  focus
In optics: point where light rays meet after travelling through a lense.

In geometry: The foci of an ellipse; two points in the interior of such a curve for which the following holds: For any curve on the ellipse, adding its distance to one focus and its distance to the other gives the same sum.

  force
In mechanics: Influence acting on a body, trying to accelerate it.

More generally: All influences by which elementary or other particles can interact; in this sense, force and interaction are synonymous. In the standard model of particle physics, there are three elementary forces: electromagnetism, the weak (nuclear) force and the strong (nuclear) force, while there is no quantum description of the fourth fundamental interaction, gravity.
frame-dragging
In Newtonian gravity , the gravitational field of a mass is independent of whether or not that mass rotates. In general relativity , a mass's rotation influences the motion of objects in its neighbourhood. Put simply, the rotating mass "drags along" space-time in the vicinity.

This is known as Lense-Thirring effect or frame-dragging. Sometimes, frame-dragging is also used in a more general sense that includes additional general-relativistic effects associated with the movement of sources of gravity. There is an analogy between gravity and  electromagnetism in which ordinary gravity corresponds to the electrostatic force , and the field components responsible for frame-dragging to *magnetism*. For this reasons, these effects also go by the name of gravitomagnetism.

  free
In the context of relativity theory, a particle (object, observer...) that is not acted upon by any force except gravity is said to be free or, a bit more specific, to be in free fall. Free test particles play an important role in understanding the structure of general relativity.

  frequency
Measure for the rapidity of an oscillation, defined as the inverse of the period of oscillation: A process that, in oscillating, repeats itself after 0.1 seconds has the frequency 1/(0.1 seconds)= 10 Hz. (The unit Hertz, abbreviated as Hz, is defined as 1 Hz = 1/second.)

For a simple wave, the frequency is given by the number of maxima going by a stationary observer in a second. Ten maxima going by per second correspond to a frequency of 10 Hz.

  Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universe
The simplest assumptions one can make about a universe are that it is homogeneous and isotropic. Homogeneity means that the properties of matter and of the geometry of spacetime are the same at every point in space. Isotropy means that all spatial directions are on the same footing, and that to a hypothetical observer, such a universe looks exactly the same, in whatever direction he or she might be looking. These assumptions are quite restrictive; in fact, it is possible to write down an expression characterizing the spacetime geometry of all homogeneous and isotropic solutions of Einstein's equations. The result is a family of spacetimes known as Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universes. Typically, these universes are either in a state of expansion or a state of collapse. The best-known example is the expanding universe described by big bang cosmology.

Sometimes, these model universes are also referred to as Friedmann-Lemaître universes, Robertson-Walker universes or Friedmann-Robertson-Walker universes.

  galaxy
Stars are rarely found alone - usually, they congregate in conglomerates of millions, billions or even more stars called galaxies. A case in point is our sun, part of a galaxy we call the milky way.

Young galaxies can be quite wild - examples for young, active galactic nuclei can be found under radio galaxy and quasar.

  galaxy cluster
Galaxies are not solitary objects - usually, they cluster together. Our own galaxy for instance, the Milky Way, is part of a small cluster called the local group of galaxies. The next-closest large galaxy cluster is the Virgo cluster.

  gamma rays
The most highly energetic variety of electromagnetic radiation , mit above a quintillion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths of less than a hundredth billionth of a meter.

  gas
In a strict sense: A state of matter in which the atoms and/or molecules wildly careen and collide, without being bound to each other. This movement leads to an inner pressure, while the average kinetic energy of the moving particles is a measure for the temperature of the gas.

Compare the other states of matter: solid state, liquid, plasma.

In a broader sense, gas is also used to denote other mixtures of freely careening particles, for instance in the case of the electron gas whose pressure stabilizes a white dwarf against further collapse.

  general theory of relativity
Albert Einstein's theory of gravity; a generalization of his special theory of relativity.

For information about the concepts and applications of this theory, we recommend the chapter general relativity of our introductory section Elementary Einstein. Further information about many different aspects of general relativity and its applications can be found in our section Spotlights on relativity.

  geodesic
A straightest-possible line in a surface or a more general space. In the plane, the geodesics are straight lines, on the surface of a sphere they are great circles.

  geodetic precession
In classical mechanics, the rotation axis of a gyroscope on which no external forces are acting will remain constant - a useful property that has found applications in navigation. However, in the presence of spacetime curvature, this is no longer true - the axis direction of a gyroscope in free fall will change over time; an effect predicted by Einstein's general theory of relativity.

  global positioning system
A system of satellites and mobile receivers that makes it possible to determine each receiver's position with high accuracy. Used by pilots, truckers, car drivers and hikers world-wide, it is an industrial application of Einstein's theories of special and general relativity: Without taking into account the effects predicted by these theories for moving clocks in a gravitational field, there would be errors of roughly 10 kilometres per day of operation in the determination of positions on earth.

  Gowdy spacetimes
Gowdy spacetimes (or universes) are simple expanding model universes. In contrast with the better known Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universes (the basis for the big bang models), Gowdy universes are not homogeneous. Instead, they are filled with a regular pattern of gravitational waves. A Gowdy T3 universe is the simplest kind of Gowdy universe, in which space has the shape of a three-dimensional torus.

More information about Gowdy universes can be found in the spotlight text Of gravitational waves and spherical chickens.

  gravitation
In classical physics: An action-at-a-distance force by which all bodies that possess mass attract each other (see Newtonian theory of gravity), synonym: gravitational force.

In Einstein's general theory of relativity: The fact that matter that possesses mass, energy, pressure or similar properties distorts space-time, and that this distortion in turn influences whatever matter might be present.

An introduction to the basic ideas of general relativity is provided by the section General relativity of Elementary Einstein. More information about the nature of gravity in general relativity can be found in the spotlight text Gravity: From weightlessness to curvature.

  gravitational constant
Constant of nature; the fundamental Newton's law of gravity and thus a measure for the natural strength of gravity. Analogously, in Einstein's equations in the general theory of relativity, it occurs as the proportionality factor determining how strongly mass, energy and similar properties of matter distort space and time. In formulae, it is usually written as G. The best current value for G is

G = (6.6742± 0.001)·10-11m3kg-1s-2.
Compared with other fundamental constants, G is known only to a comparatively low accuracy.

  gravitational field
The totality of all gravitational influences that one or more massive objects can exert on bodies in their vicinity.

More precisely: At every location in space, the gravitational field is defined as the acceleration that a small test particle present at that location would feel due to the gravitational forces of the masses around it.

  gravitational lens
In Einstein's general relativity, gravity necessarily acts not only on material bodies, but also on light - light passing a massive body is deflected. This deflection can be so strong that light of one and the same cosmic object reaches an observer along multiple paths - corresponding to the observer seeing multiple images of that object in the sky. Masses that, in this sense, act like very special optical lenses are called gravitational lenses.

More information can be found in the spotlight text A brief history of gravitational lenses.

  gravitational redshift
According to general relativity, light flying away from a massive body (or other source of gravity) experience a redshift - its frequency decreases and the light becomes less energetic. On the other hand, light flying towards a massive body gets blueshifted - its frequency and energy increase.

  gravitational wave astronomy
Nascent discipline of astronomy which aims at using gravitational waves to gain information about cosmic objects or the cosmos as a whole - for instance about what's happening in the core region of a supernova, about neutron star or about the heated past of our universe.

So far, though, scientists are still working on the first direct detection of gravitational waves using highly sophisticated gravitational wave detectors, after which gravitational wave astronomy is hoped to begin in earnest.

  gravitational waves
Distortions of space geometry that propagate through space with the speed of light, analogous to ripples on the surface of a pond propagating as water waves.

For more informations about gravitational waves, please consult the chapter Gravitational waves of Elementary Einstein.

Selected aspects of gravitational wave physics are described in the category Gravitational waves of our Spotlights on relativity.

  graviton
Hypothetical carrier particle in a quantum theory of gravity. However, as of yet physicists have but a rough idea of how a complete theory of quantum gravity will look like.

  great circle
Circle on the surface of a sphere whose center coincides with that of the sphere itself. On the globe, the equator is a great circle, while every meridian corresponds to half of a great circle.

If you want to move on a spherical surface in the straightest possible way, choose a path along a great circle - in the language of mathematics this is equivalent to saying: great circles are geodesics of a spherical surface.

  Hawking temperature
Characteristic temperature of the Hawking radiation of a black hole. For simple, spherically symmetric black holes, it is

TH = 6· 10-8 (solar mass/mass of the black hole) Kelvin. [Problems reading expressions such as 10-8? See exponential notation.]
  Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
Fundamental law of quantum theory: All physical quantities that can be measured come in pairs. If one of the quantities in a pair is measured with high precision, the corresponding other quantity is necessarily determined only very vaguely. It is impossible to measure precisely and simultaneously both quantities in one and the same pair.

An example for such a pair are the location and the velocity of a quantum particle: Very precise measurements of the location disturb the velocity; if the velocity is measured precisely, it is automatically unclear where exactly the particle is located.

  horizon
In general relativity: A closed surface that is the boundary of a black hole. Whatever enters through this boundary from the outside can never again leave the inside.

Synonym: event horizon.

  Hubble constant
In an expanding universe such as that of the big bang models, every observer will find: The apparent velocity with which the galaxies around him recede is proportional to their distance; the more distant a galaxy, the more its distance increases in a given time. This relation was first found by the astronomer Edwin Hubble in the 1920s from observations of far-away galaxies; it is hence called Hubble relation or Hubble effect, and the constant of proportionality between speed and distance is the Hubble constant.

A visualisation of the Hubble effect can be found on the page The expanding universe in the chapter on cosmology of Elementary Einstein.

The Hubble relation only holds for all galaxies in an idealized universe whose expansion neither accelerates nor slows down. In more realistic universes, it is true in good approximation only for galaxies that are not too far away.

  hydrogen
The lightest (and, in our universe, the most abundant) chemical element. The atomic nucleus of an ordinary hydrogen atom is a single proton. If the atomic nucleus contains an additional neutron, the atom is called heavy hydrogen or deuterium.

  imaginary time
Certain quantum calculations (notably the calculation of path integrals as a way to find quantum mechanical probabilities) involve an algebraic manipulation of the following kind: Wherever the time coordinate t occurs, it is replaced by i·t, where i is the "imaginary unit", a number defined to have the remarkable property i2=i·i=-1. At the end of the calculation, the substitution is reversed. The combination T=i·t is called imaginary time.

Most such calculations occur in particle physics, in the framework of special relativity, where there are rigorous mathematical proofs showing how the use of imaginary time leads to correct results.

Imaginary time has also been employed in some candidate theories for a theory of quantum gravity, notably in certain types of quantum cosmology. This, however, involves the flexible time of general relativity, and both the details of the imaginary time recipe and the more general question whether or not imaginary time can usefully be employed in this context in the first place are still unresolved, and the object of current research.

Some more information about path integrals and the role of imaginary time can be found in the spotlight text The sum over all possibilities, while imaginary time in quantum cosmology is briefly discussed in Searching for the quantum beginning of the universe.

  inertia
Basic law of classical mechanics and special relativity: bodies on which no external forces act move with constant speed on straight paths. In the geometrical language of special relativity, this can be reformulated as: bodies on which no external forces act move on straight line in space-time.

Strictly speaking, though, this law is only true in specific reference frames. This gives rise to a further, more precise reformulation: It is always possible to find a reference frame on which bodies on which no external forces act move with constant speed along straight paths. Such reference frames are called inertial frames.

In general relativity, the law of inertia holds in a somewhat modified form: there, bodies on which no external, non-gravitational forces act move not on straight lines through space-time, but on geodesics.

  inertial forces
In classical mechanics or special relativity: Whenever an observer who is not an inertial observer wants to explain the movements of bodies using the law "force equals mass times acceleration", that observer has to assume the existence of additional forces; these are called inertial forces. For ordinary forces like the electric force, the magnetic or the gravitational force, one can always state which bodies are acting on which other bodies; inertial forces, in contrast, appear to act on bodies "from nowhere".

A famous example for an inertial force is the centrifugal force - an observer riding a merry-go-round needs to introduce that force to explain why he and all other riders are pulled away from the axis of rotation.

inertial observer
An inertial reference frame is a reference frame in which the first law of classical mechanics holds: A body on which no external forces act either remains at rest or moves with constant speed along a straight path. An inertial observer is an observer that is at rest with respect to an inertial reference frame. In the context of relativity, an inertial reference frame is one that drifts in gravity-free space without undergoing rotation or being accelerated.

Inertial reference frames play a central role in special relativity: the basic postulates of that theory are the relativity principle (which holds that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial reference frames - no such frame is special, in this sense) and the postulate that the speed of light has the same value for every inertial observer.

In general relativity, there are no real inertial observers, however, by what's called the equivalence principle, the laws of physics for an observer that is in free fall and performs his measurements only in his direct neighbourhood (and only over a limited period of time), the laws of physics are approximately the same as for an inertial observer.

  infrared
Electromagnetic radiation in the frequency region between a hundred billion and a trillion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths between 0.8 micrometres and 1 millimetre. The thermal radiation associated with everyday temperatures is infrared radiation.

  INTEGRAL
Satellite launched in 2002 as a space-borne gamma ray observatory by the European Space Agency.

Public outreach pages of the INTEGRAL mission

  interference
When waves meet and are superposed, they can amplify or dampen each other. These superposition effects are called interference effects: Wherever a wave-crest meets a wave-crest, a higher wave-crest results (constructive interference); when a wave-crest meets a trough, there can be a complete cancellation between the two (destructive interference).

Interference can happen among electromagnetic waves (such as light), but also among water waves and among sound waves.

  interferometric detector
Gravitational wave detector that utilizes interference between light waves to detect minute changes in distance effected by a passing gravitational wave.

Some of the physics behind interferometric detectors can be found in our spotlight topic Catching the wave with light.

Exmples for interferometric detectors are GEO600 and the LIGO detectors.

  intergalactic medium
A thin gas that fills some parts of the empty regions between galaxies. The distribution is non-uniform; filaments of intergalactic medium are separated by voids with much lower density. The main ingredient of the intergalactic medium is ionized hydrogen, in other words: a plasma consisting of an equal number of hydrogen nuclei (protons) and electrons. The average density of the intergalactic medium is estimated to be between ten and a hundred times that of the universe as a whole, corresponding to between ten and a hundred hydrogen atoms per cubic meter.

  International Space Station
Space station in an earth orbit, constructed as a cooperative project of 16 different nations. In the context of relativity, its main interest is as an example for a laboratory in free fall in the earth's gravitational field.

ISS pages (NASA)

  ion
Usually, an atom possesses as many electrically positive protons in its nucleus as it has electrically negative electrons in its shell, rendering it, overall, electrically neutral. Atoms that have more or fewer electrons and are thus, as a whole, electrically charged, are called ions. If you start with an atom that is electrically neutral and make it into an ion by removing or adding electrons, you have ionized that atom.

  isotope
Different species of atomic nuclei which contain the same number of protons (and thus represent the same chemical element), but different numbers of neutrons, are called isotopes.

Thus, helium-4 (two protons, two neutrons) and helium-3 (two protons, one neutron) are isotopes, but helium-3 and tritium (one proton, two neutrons) are not. The word can also be used of a specific species of nucleus and a generic chemical element, as in "helium-3 is an isotope of helium".

  Joule
The unit of energy in the International System of units (SI). One Joule is equal to one kilogram times square meter over square second, in short: 1 J = 1 kg m2/s2. It is equal to the kinetic energy gained by an object of the mass one kilogram that has been accelerated with an acceleration of one meter per square second over a distance of one meter.

  Karlstad University
University (enrolment ca. 10,000) in central Sweden. Research areas include a number of relativistic topics, from string theory to the mathematics of general relativity.
Karlstad University website

  Kelvin scale
The temperature scale used in physics, synonym: absolute temperature.

The zero point of the Kelvin scale is at absolute zero; a temperature difference of one Kelvin (abbreviated 1 K and, rarely, also called one "degree Kelvin") is the same as a difference of one degree Celsius, as both scales differ only by their choice of zero point: X degrees Celsius are (X plus 273.15) Kelvin, Y Kelvin are (Y minus 273,15) degrees Celsius.

Relation to the Fahrenheit scale: X degrees Fahrenheit are (X+459,67)*5/9 Kelvin, Y Kelvin are (Y*9/5)-459,67 degrees Fahrenheit.

  Kepler's laws
Basic laws governing the orbital motions of planets around the sun. First law: Each planetary orbit is an ellipse, with the sun in one of its focus points. Second law: If you connect the planet and the sun by an imaginary line then, in equal time intervals, the line will sweep out equally large areas, independent on where the planet is on its orbit. Third law: dividing the square of a planet's orbital period by the third power of it's average distance from the sun gives the same value for all planets in the solar system; written as a formula: (period)2/(average distance to the sun)3 = const.

Kepler's laws follow directly from the laws of classical mechanics and Newton's law of gravity. However, they are only valid approximately - the gravitational pull of the planets on each other, as well as the fact that, ultimately, gravity is governed not by Newton's laws, but by general relativity (see relativistic perihelion shift) lead to small deviations from perfectly elliptic orbits.

  Kerr black hole
The simplest kind of rotating black hole: a model universe containing a single rotating black hole and nothing else. This solution to Einstein's equations was found by Roy Kerr in 1963.

  Kerr-Newman black hole
The simplest kind of rotating, electrically charged black hole: a model universe containing a single rotating, charged black hole and nothing else. This solution to Einstein's equations was found independently by Roy Kerr and Ted Newman in 1963.

  kilogram
In the international system of units (SI), the unit of mass; defined by a reference mass that is kept in Paris, France.

  kinetic energy
A type of energy that has to be ascribed to an object simply because that object moves relative to the reference frame. In classical, pre-Einstein physics, the amount of energy is given by a half times an object's mass times the square of its speed.

  Lamb shift
Typically, electromagnetic radiation is emitted by atoms only at very specific frequencies that depend on the type of atom. For a number of these characteristic frequencies, the relativistic quantum theory of electromagnetism (called quantum electrodynamics) predicts a slight shift, as compared with earlier theories. This is the Lamb shift. Experiments have confirmed the prediction.

  Large Hadron Collider
The Large Hadron Collider is a particle accelerator currently under construction in the research centre CERN. From the point of view of relativity theory, it has several points of interest: First of all, the protons it accelerates will reach higher energies than ever, allowing new tests of the relativistic quantum field theories that are at the core of modern particle physics. Secondly, at such high energies, there should be first traces of an as-yet unproven symmetry of nature called supersymmetry, which plays an important role in string theory, one of the candidates for a theory of quantum gravity (the quantum theory version of Einstein's general relativity). Finally, the high energies are interesting because they give information about the very early high temperature universe, and about the physics that should be included in the big bang models of relativistic cosmology.

CERN website

  laser
Abbreviation for "Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation". Technique for the production of very concentrated, strong light with a fixed frequency, which propagates as a very simple electromagnetic wave in which wave crests and wave troughs are in perfect step ("coherent light").

  length contraction
Effect of special relativity theory: An observer (more precisely: an inertial observer) measures a shorter length for a moving object than for an identical copy of that object resting beside him (here, length refers to extension in the direction of movement - extension in orthogonal directions remains the same).

  light
Light in the strict sense of the word is electromagnetic radiation the human eye can detect, with wave-lengths between 400 and 700 nanometres. In relativity theory and in astronomy, the word is often used in a more general sense, encompassing all kinds of electromagnetic radiation. For instance, astronomers might talk about "infrared light" or "gamma light"; in this context, light in the stricter sense is referred to as "visible light".

Within classical physics, the properties of light are governed by Maxwell's equations; in quantum physics, it turns out that light is a stream of energy packets called light quanta or photons.

In the context of relativistic physics, light is of great interest, and for a number of reasons. First of all, the speed of light plays a central role in both special and general relativity. Also, there are a number of interesting effects in general relativity which are associated with the propagation of light, namely deflection, the Shapiro effect and the gravitational redshift.

  light elements
According to the big bang models, the early universe underwent a brief period of primordial nucleosynthesis between a few seconds and a few minutes cosmic time, during which nuclei of light elements such as heavy hydrogen, helium and lithium formed.

A brief account of this Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be found in the spotlight text Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and change provides more information about the physical processes involved and Elements of the past describes how the predictions of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be tested against astronomical observation.

  light speed
The speed at which light ore, more generally, electromagnetic radiation propagates through space (especially: through empty space). Central quantity in special relativity: There, the constancy of the speed of light is a basic postulate: ever observer (more precisely: every inertial observer) that measures the speed of light in a vacuum obtains the same constant value, c=299,792,458 metres per second.

Another important relativistic aspect of the speed of light is that it defines an absolute upper speed limit: In special relativity, nothing can move faster than light, and information or influence at most be transmitted at light-speed. In general relativity, the same law is in force locally: No object, no matter, no information can directly overtake or catch up with light (cf. causality).

Basic information about the role of light speed in special relativity can be found in the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein.

  light-cone
In special as in general relativity, the speed of light sets the upper limit for the transmission of influences and signals. Thus, studying the propagation of light, one can find out for an event A which other events can influence A, which can be influenced by A, and where any influence is impossible (because such influence would have had to traval faster than light - cf. causal structure). Graphically, the boundary between the two sets of events where influence is possible/impossible has the form of a double cone (for a sketch, see the page Spacetime in the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein). It is formed by all world-lines of hypothetical light signals that would be emitted at the event A or, coming from an arbitrary direction, absorbed there.

  Light-second
Units of distance: A light-year is the distance a light signal traverses during one year of flight-time, a light-second the distance it traverses in a second, and so on.

The following table translates these units into the more familiar kilometres or seconds:
1 light-second	=	300000 km	=	186000 mi.
1 light-minute	=	18 millionen km	=	11 million mi.
1 light-hour	=	1.1 billion km	=	670 million mi.
1 light-day	=	25 billion km	=	16 billion mi.
1 light-year	=	9.5 trillion km	=	6 trillion mi.
  light-wave
Light is a mixture of simple waves, each a regular succession of maxima and minima of the electromagnetic fields. The same is true for all other varieties of electromagnetic radiatio

  line
Geometric object with a single dimension. A line can either be an independent one-dimensional space (in the abstract mathematical space where a space need not have three dimensions), or it can be embedded into a more general space, like a line drawn onto a piece of paper (i.e. a surface).
  liquid
State of matter in which the constituent atoms and molecules are bound to each other (in contrast with a gas, where there is hardly any binding), but so loosely that the matter cannot maintain any shape without external support: If you place a liquid into a container, its shape will adapt to that of the container (in contrast with a solid body, which will keep its shape, and in common with other fluids such as gas or plasma).

Compare the other states of matter: solid state, gas, plasma.

  LISA
The concept of LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna), a space-based gravitational wave detector, has been studied jointly by the European and US space agencies ESA and NASA for 20 years. Due to shortage of money on the NASA side, currently ESA is studying a variant of the original LISA concept, called eLISA (or sometimes NGO), that ESA could afford on its own, should NASA not be able to come up with a financial contribution.
local group
The galaxy cluster of which our very own galaxy, the Milky Way, is a member. Cosmically speaking, the local group is rather puny - its only members apart from the Milky Way are the Andromeda galaxy, the galaxy M33 and a number of dwarf galaxies (such as the Magellanic clouds).

  Lockman hole
A region in the sky, located in the constellation Ursa Major (better known as the Big Dipper), and covering an area about 75 times that of the full moon. Pointing their telescopes at this region, astronomers will encounter only negligible amounts of the hydrogen gas that fills significant portions of our galaxy. These are ideal conditions for obtaining a clear and unobstructed view of objects in deep space, far beyond our own galaxy. Not surprisingly, the Lockman hole is one of the most intensively studied regions in the night sky.

  logarithmic
In graphic representations of physical data, a way of plotting values according to their common logarithm. The common logarithm y=log(x) of a number x is the number y for which x=10y, so the logarithm of 10 is 1, the logarithm of 100 is 2, and so on.

In ordinary ("linear") plots, the distance between the values 1 and 2 is the same as between the values 2 and 3. In a logarithmic plot, the distance between the values 1 and 10 is the same as the distance between 10 and 100 and the distance between 100 and 1000.

  lookback time
The time that light from a distance body needs to reach us here on earth. Lookback time, defined using the cosmic time coordinate, is one way of defining distances in an expanding universe.

  loop quantum gravity
Candidate theory for a theory of quantum gravity. Loop quantum gravity is an attempt to apply the concepts and laws of quantum theory directly to the geometry that is at the heart of general relativity.

A brief description can be found on the page Loop quantum gravity in the chapter Relativity and the quantum of Elementary Einstein.

  magnetic field
The magnetic force is a force by which electric currents (i.e. moving electric charges) act on each other; the magnetic field is the associated field. All phenomena related to the magnetic force or magnetic field are subsumed under the heading of magnetism. Magnetic fields cannot be understood separate from electric fields - their complete description is possibly only within the more general context of electromagnetism.

  mass
In classical physics, mass plays a triple role. First of all, it is a measure for how easy it is to influence the motion of a body. Imagine that you're drifting in emtpy space. Drifting by are an elephant and a mouse, and you give each of them a push of equal strength. The fact that the mouse abruptly changes its path, while the elephant's course is as good as unaltered, is a sure sign that the mass (or, in the language of physics, the inertia or inertial mass) of the elephant is much greater than that of the mouse. Secondly, mass is a measure of how many atoms there are in a body, and of what type they are. All atoms of one and the same type have the same mass, and adding up all those tiny component masses, the total mass of the body results. Thirdly, in Newton's theory of gravity, mass determines how strongly a body attracts other bodies via the gravitational force, and how strongly these bodies attract it (in this sense, mass is the charge associated with the gravitational force).

In special relativity, one can also define a mass that is a measure for a bodies resistance to changing its motion. However, the value of this relativistic mass depends on the relative motion of the body and the observer. The relativistic mass is the "m" in Einstein's famous E=mc2 (cf. equivalence of mass and energy).

The relativistic mass has a minimum for an observer that is at rest relative to the body in question. This value is the so-called rest mass of the body, and when particle physicists talk of mass, this is usually what they mean. Just as in classical physics, the rest mass is a kind of measure for how much matter the body is made up of - with one caveat: For composite bodies, the energies associated with the forces holding the body together contribute to the total mass, as well (another consequence of the equivalence of mass and energy).

In general relativity, mass still plays a role as a source of gravity; however, it has been joined by physical quantities such as energy, momentum and pressure.

  mass defect
Whenever two or more objects are bound together by strong forces, there is a binding energy - the energy needed to pry these objects apart. Since Einstein, we know that energy and mass are equivalent. To this binding energy there corresponds a mass. It is called the mass defect because, by this amount, the mass of the component object is less than the sum of the masses of its parts.

Some more information about binding energies and the mass defect can be found in the spotlight topic Is the whole the sum of its parts?

  Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics/Albert Einstein Institute
Research institute of the Max Planck Society, dedicated to research on Einstein's theory of gravity - from the mathematical foundations to astrophysical questions and the search for a quantum theory of gravity. Founded in 1995, located in Potsdam, Germany; the experimental branch of the institute, located in Hannover and dedicated to research with the gravitational wave detector GEO 600, was founded in 2002.

AEI website 
AEI-Hannover website

  Maxwell's equations
The four fundamental equations of electromagnetism that describe how magnetic and electric infuences (in physics language: electric and magnetic fields) are produced: Electric fields are produced whenever there are electric charges or, alternatively, when magnetic fields change over time. Magnetic fields are produced whenever there are electric currents (moving electric charges), but also whenever electric fields change over time. The fact that electric and magnetic fields can exist without the presence of charges or currents, simply by mutual excitation where a change in the magnetic field produces an electric field and vice versa, is the basic phenomenon behind electromagnetic waves.

  mechanics, classical
Synonym: Newtonian mechanics. According to classical mechanics, the movements of bodies are regulated by Newton's three laws of mechanics. The first law states that bodies on which no external force acts stay at rest or move with constant speed along a straight path ("law of inertia"). The second law relates the force acting on a body, the body's mass and the acceleration caused by the force: Force is equal to mass times acceleration. The Third law is the law of "action equals reaction": If a body A acts on a body B with a certain force, then A itself experiences B acting on it with a force that is equal in strength but has the opposite direction.

An alternative version of the second law uses the concept of momentum: The force acting on a body is equal to the change of that body's momentum over time.

  mechanics, relativistic
The generalization of classical mechanics that takes into account the effects of special relativity. The basic laws are almost unchanged: First of all, bodies on which no external forces act stay at rest or move with constant speed along straight paths - in the language of special relativity: such bodies move on straight lines in space-time. Secondly: The total force acting on a body is equal to the change of its momentum over time (but notice: this momentum is defined using the body's relativistic mass, which depends on the bodies speed relative to the observer). Thirdly, mass and momentum are conserved quantities - their total sum is the same whenever particles interact (this is equivalent to a slightly modified version of the "action equals reaction" principle of classical mechanics).

There exists an elegant reformulation of these laws of mechanics using four-dimensional concepts adapted to the geometry of space-time, such as the "four-momentum".

  meter
In the international system of units (SI), the basic unit for length. Since 1983, the official definition uses the constancy of the speed of light as postulated in special relativity: the metre is defined with the help of the basic unit for time, the second: a metre is the distance that light travels in a vacuum in one 299792458th of a second.

  micro
"Micro" as a prefix denotes "one millionths", making a micrometre a millionth of a meter.
  microquasar
An astronomical object comparable in size to a star, which emits enormous amounts of energy; the processes responsible for the emission are similar to those which happen in quasars or other active galactic nuclei. The key component of a microquasar is a central stellar black hole; more information about how black holes can lead to such enormous energy output can be found in the spotlight text Luminous disks: How black holes light up their surroundings.

  microwaves
Electromagnetic radiation with wave-lengths between a millimetre and 30 centimetres, corresponding to frequencies between some and some hundred billion oscillations per second.

Looking up to the night sky, almost all energy that reaches us of the cosmic background radiation is in the form of microwaves.

  Milky Way
1. Our home galaxy - a spiral galaxy, a disk of stars with a diameter of roughly hundred thousand light-years and a thickness between three- and six thousand light-years, containing about 100 billions of stars ("billions and billions"). It also contains a supermassive black hole in its centre - more about that in our spotlight topic The black heart of the Milky Way.

2. As our sun is located within the disk of the Milky Way galaxy, there are directions in which we can observe comparatively few of the other stars in our galaxy (namely as we look perpendicularly to the disk, or nearly so) and directions in which we can see a large amount of stars (as we look approximately in parallel to the disk plane). The result is that there is a dim band in the night sky marking the disk plane (the directions where we see a lot of the other stars). This band is also known as the Milky Way.

  milli
"Milli" as a prefix denotes "one thousandth", making a millimetre a thousandth of a meter.
  momentum
Physical quantity that is equal to a body's mass times its velocity (in special relativity: its relativistic mass times its velocity).

What makes momentum a useful quantity is that it is conserved - if several bodies interact, the sum of their momenta before and after the interaction is the same. Momentum is neither created nor destroyed, merely passed on from one body to another.

In general relativity, momentum is one of a number of quantities (like mass and energy) that acts as a source of gravity.

  muon
An elementary particle which is a somewhat heavier version of the electron. Its electric charge is the same as that of the electron, and like that particle, it does not interact via the strong force. The muon's mass is 207 times that of the electron.

  naked singularity
In general relativity, singularities - ragged edges of spacetime - that form in the collapse of massive bodies or in similar processes are typically hidden inside black holes, in other words: spacetime in their vicinity is distorted so much that no information about the singularity can ever reach the outside world. Hypothetical singularities which are not cloaked in this way, and thus are visible to the rest of the cosmos, are called "naked". By the cosmic censorship hypothesis, no realistic kind of collapse can lead to the formation of a naked singularity.

  nano
"Nano" as a prefix denotes "one billionth", making a nanometre one billionth of a meter.

  National Aeronautics and Space Administration
That part of the US government in charge not only of manned space missions, but also responsible for numerous highly successful satellite and probe missions. NASA is a partner in projects such as the Hubble space telescope or the gravitational wave detector LISA.

NASA website

  neutron
Particle that is electrically neutral and comparatively massive; the atomic nuclei consist of neutrons and protons.

Neutrons are not elementary particles, they are compound particles consisting of quarks that are bound together through the strong nuclear interaction . Collectively, neutrons, protons and a number of similar particles are called baryons.

Different kind of neutron matter are the stuff neutron stars are made of.

  neutron star
Final stage of massive stars that explode as a supernova. In the explosion process, the core of the star collapses to form a compact object with roughly 1.4 solar masses that mostly consists of nuclear matter, predominantly of neutrons.

For astronomers, neutron stars are of interest as there exists a variety called pulsars from which they receive highly regular pulses of electromagneticradiation. For relativists, they are interesting as the typical effects of general relativity are very pronounced in objects that compact (compare PSR 1913+16).

  Newton
English physicist of the 16th/17th century, see Newtonian gravity, below.

In the international system of units (SI) the unit of force, abbreviation N. One Newton is the force needed to impart on a body of mass one kilogram an acceleration of one meter per second-squared.

  Newtonian gravity
In pre-Einstein mechanics, which goes back to the English physicist and mathematician Isaac Newton (1643-1727), gravity is a force with which masses act on each other. As other forces do, they cause bodies to accelerate.

In its simplest form, Newton's law of gravity describes the force acting between two spherical, symmetric masses: The force with which the first sphere acts on the second is equal to the mass of the first sphere times the mass of the second sphere times Newton's gravitational constant, divided by the square of the distance between the centre-points of the two spheres.

  nonlinear
In some physical theories, influences can simply be added up - take the electric force associated with one particular charged body, the electric force associated with a different body, and their sum will be the electric force felt by a test particle when both bodies are present. Such theories are called linear; theories where separate contributions do not simply add up are called nonlinear, an important example being Einstein's general relativity.

  nuclear fission
Processes in which a heavier atomic nucleus splits up into several lighter nuclei. If the initial nucleus is heavy enough, energy is set free in the split. Nuclear fission reactions are used in nuclear reactors to produce electrical energy, and in nuclear weapons to power an energetic explosion.

Some more information about nuclear fission can be found in the spotlight topic Is the whole the sum of its parts?. The role played in nuclear fission and fusion by Einstein's famous formula E=mc2 is the subject of the spotlight topic From E=mc2 to the atomic bomb.
nuclear fusion
Processes in which two lighter atomic nuclei merge to form a more massive nucleus. For nuclei lighter than those of iron, energy is released in fusion. This is the main source of energy of ordinary stars like our sun.

Some more information about nuclear fusion can be found in the spotlight topic Is the whole the sum of its parts?. The role played in nuclear fusion and fission by Einstein's famous formula E=mc2 is the subject of the spotlight topic From E=mc2 to the atomic bomb.

  nucleosynthesis
The formation of complicated nuclei from constitutents such as protons and neutrons. According to the big bang models, the early universe was filled with a particle soup of protons and neutrons. Nucleosynthesis includes all processes by which, from these humble beginnings, arose the complex atomic nuclei that we find in the universe today.

The first light elements (mainly nuclei of deuterium, helium, and lithium) formed already at cosmic time between a few seconds and a few minutes (primordial nucleosynthesis or Big Bang Nucleosynthesis); more massive nuclei up to those of iron formed and continue to form in the course of fusion processes inside stars; nuclei that are even more massive form in the course of supernova explosions. These explosions also serve to disseminate the complex nuclei formed inside stars (stellar nucleosynthesis) in space.

A brief account of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be found in the spotlight text Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and change provides more information about the physical processes involved and Elements of the past describes how the predictions of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be tested against astronomical observation.

  nucleus
Extremely dense central region of an atom, consisting of protons and neutrons held together by nuclear_forces. The number of protons determines what chemical element a nucleus represents.

Typical diameter for atomic nuclei are in the region of a quadrillionth of a metre= 10-15 metres. This makes nuclei about a hundredth of a thousandth as large as atoms.

  numerical relativity
Subdiscipline of physics devoted to the use of computer simulations for exploring the structure and consequences of Einstein's theories, special and general relativity.

Notably, the centerpiece of general relativity are Einstein's equations, which relate certain properties of the matter contained in a spacetime to that spacetime's geometry. A model universe in which matter distorts the geometry - and is in turn influenced by those distortions - in exactly the way prescribed by Einstein's equations is called a solution of these equations. Some simple solutions can simply be written down on a piece of paper ("exact solutions"). More complicated situations can only be described by simulating space, time and matter in a computer ("numerical solution"), and this is one of the main tasks of numerical relativity.

Numerical relativity has led to interesting results about black holes and gravitational waves, for instance about the gravitational wave produced when two black holes collide and merge. They have also shed light on what general relativity predicts for the properties of spacetime close to a black hole's central singularity (further information about this can be found in the spotlight text Of singularities and breadmaking). The branch of numerical relativity that is of interest for the study of phenomena such as supernovae, jets, and merging or collapsing neutron stars is relativistic (magneto-)hydrodynamics, more about which can be found in the spotlight text The realm of relativistic hydrodynamics.

  observer
In the context of relativity, "observer" can mean two different things.

Often, observer is synonymous with reference frame or (space-time-)coordinate system: An observer in this sense is someone who assigns coordinate to everything that happens around him. In particular, all events are assigned space coordinate values and a time cordinate value. In the context of special relativity, it is often the case that when there is talk of an observer, what is meant is really an inertial observer, corresponding to a special type of reference frame.

On other occasions, the term is used in a more narrow sense - in those cases, an observer is someone sitting at a certain point in space and using the light signals reaching that location to construct an image of his surroundings. In the context of optical effects in relativity, for instance gravitational lensing, observer is usually meant in this way.

  Olbers' paradox
In an infinitely extended universe that does not change over time and is evenly filled with stars, the "night sky" would look as bright as the surface of the sun. The reason: The farther away a star, the weaker the light we receive from it. But: The greater the distance, the greater the number of stars that have exactly that distance from us. In an eternal and infinite universe, the two effects cancel exactly.

The big bang models based on Einstein's general theory of relativity, with a changing universe evolving out of a hot initial state, make no such counter-factual prediction.

  path integrals
Synonym: Sum over histories. A technique for performing calculations in quantum theory. Roughly speaking, the probability for a certain outcome (for instance, a particle reaching location A at time t) is calculated by performing a sum over all possible ways in which this particular outcome can come about.

A description of the path integral formulation of quantum theory can be found in the spotlight text The sum over all possibilities.

  Pauli exclusion principle
Basic principle of quantum theory stating that no two fermions can be in exactly the same state - for instance: no two fermions with identical properties can be at the same location. Formulated by the physicist Wolfgang Pauli.

Electrons are fermions, and the Pauli exclusion principle plays a crucial role in bringing about the properties of matter as we know them: It is responsible for the fact that the electrons of atoms do not all cluster together in the lowest-energy state close to the atomic nucleus, but instead spread out, occupying different states. This is what gives atoms their shell structure, responsible for different atoms' different chemical properties.

  perihelion
For a planet or other heavenly body orbiting the sun on an elliptic orbit, that point of the orbit closest to the sun. In the context of general relativity, the perihelion is of great interest as that theory predicts a slight motion of this point around the sun, cf. (relativistic) perihelion shift.

  perihelion advance, relativistic
For planetary orbits, there is a minute difference between the predictions of Newtonian gravity and general relativity. For instance, in Newton's theory, the orbital curve of a lonely planet orbiting a star is an ellipse. In general relativity, it is a kind of rosetta curve, corresponding to a partial ellipse that, in toto, shifts a bit with each additional orbit. The shift can be defined by looking at the point on each orbit closest to the sun, each perihelion, and the additional relativistic shift is, hence, called relativistic perihelion shift or relativistic perihelion advance. A picture can be seen on the page A planet goes astray in the chapter General relativity of Elementary Einstein.

  photo effect
When light shines onto a metal, it can knock electrons out of the metal's atoms. This is the photoelectric effect, and its properties - how does the number andenergy of the electrons depend on the frequency and intensity of the light? - can only be explained if one accepts that light is no mere electromagnetic wave, but somehow made up of some kind of light particles. With this postulate, Einstein, in 1905, paved the way for the later development of quantum mechanics.

  photon
Synonym: light particle, light quantum. In quantum theory, light is not a continuous electromagnetic wave, but a steady stream of tiny energy packets - photons.

  photon radius
In a certain distance from a spherically symmetric black hole, the deflection of light because of the black hole's gravity is so great that light can move on closed circular orbits - photons (light particles) can, at this distance, orbit the black hole like a planet the sun. This particular distance is called the photon radius.

An observer at rest at this distance can see the back of his or her own head (or at least a small region thereof), as the photons emitted by the back of the head travel once around the black hole and fly directly into his or her eyes.

  Planck energy
Natural unit of energy that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural constants that govern space-time, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the gravitational constant, Planck's constant and the speed of light. Whenever elementary particles reach this kind of energy, in addition to the effects of quantum theory, the effects of general relativity should become important, in short: such situations could only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.

Compare: Planck length, Planck time, Planck mass.

  Planck length
Natural length that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural constants that govern space-time, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the gravitational constant, Planck's constant and the speed of light. It amounts to roughly 1.6·10-35 metres.

[Problems reading expressions such as 10-35? See exponential notation.]

At such length scales, both the effects of quantum theory and those of general relativity should become important, in short: whatever concerns such scales can only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.

Compare Planck time, Planck energy, Planck mass.

  Planck mass
Natural unit of mass that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural constants that govern space-time, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the gravitational constant, Planck's constant and the speed of light. Compared with the masses we're used to in everday life, the Planck mass is rather small, a mere 2 hundredth of a thousandth of a gram. However, if this mass is concentrated in a single elementary particle then, in addition to the effects of quantum theory, the effects of general relativity should become important, in short: such a particle could only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.

Compare Planck length, Planck time, Planck energy.

  Planck time
Natural interval of time that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural constants that govern space-time, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the gravitational constant, Planck's constant and the speed of light. It amounts to about 5·10-44 seconds and is the time it takes light to traverse one Planck length's worth of distance.

[Problems reading expressions such as 10-44? See exponential notation.]

At such time scales - for instance: at cosmic time comparable to the Planck time in the big bang models - both the effects of quantum theory and those of general relativity should become important, in short: such time intervals and what happens in them can only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.

Compare: Planck length, Planck energy, Planck mass.

  Planck's constant
Fundamental constant of quantum theory; of the dimension energy times time. For instance, the energy of a single photon is equal to Planck's constant times the photon's frequency. Abbreviated as h in formulae.

  Planck's radiation law
The fundamental law governing the properties of the simplest form of thermal radiation - that emitted by a blackbody. It describes the spectrum of such radiation in terms of universal constants and a single parameter - the body's temperature. The result is also called a blackbody spectrum.

  plane
A surface within which the axioms of Euclidean geometry (synonym: plane geometry) hold - the rules of geometry as they are taught in high school, with well-known formulae such as Pythagoras' theorem and "the perimeter of a circle is 2 times pi times its radius" hold.

  planet
Planets are not-too-small companions of a star that are not stars themselves (nor ever were stars). In our solar system, the planets are, listed from the one closest to the sun to the one farthest: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune. As of August 2006, Pluto, which used to be a proper planet, is officially a "dwarf planet". In the night sky, the distinguishing characteristic of planets is that they move around relative to the unchanging background of stars - which gave them their name, loosely translated from Greek as "wanderers".

  plasma
State of matter in which a sizeable number of atoms have lost electrons to make for an electrically interacting mixture of electrons and rump atoms, or even naked atomic nuclei flying around.

Compare the other states of matter: solid state, gas, liquid.

  point
Elementary "building block" of geometrical entities such as surfaces or more general spaces. For instance, a surface is the set of all its points, of all possible locations on the surface, and all geometrical object in that surface are defined by the points that belong to them - for instance, a line on the surface is the set of (infinitely many) points.

  polarization
Waves that are especially simple can be completely described by stating the direction in which they propagate, their speed of propagation, frequency, and amplitude. But there are also simple wave where these quantities are not sufficient for a complete description - for these waves, the oscillation has an orientation in space. This orientation, which is called polarization, needs to be specified as well.

For example, for electromagnetic waves, the polarization describes the directions of the electric and the magnetic fields. For gravitational waves, the polarization describes the orientation of the two orthogonal directions in which distances are maximally stretched and squeezed as the gravitational wave passes.

  post-Newtonian formalism
For situations in which gravity is very weak, general relativity and Newton's theory of gravity lead to very similar predictions for the motion of bodies and the propagation of light. Such situations can be described by starting out with the Newtonian description and then, step by step, adding correction terms that take into account the effects of general relativity. The post-Newtonian formalism is a method for performing those step-by-step corrections. As the correction terms are ordered in a systematic way (the largest effects are called "of first post-Newtonian order, 1pN", the next smallest ones of second order, and so on), the progression of ever smaller corrections is also called the post-Newtonian expansion.

The post-Newtonian formalism is used to describe planetary motion as well as the propagation of light within our solar system; it is also used to describe the relativistic effects within binary neutron star systems.

  potential energy
When an object is being acted upon by a force like the electric or gravitational force, then it can be assigned an energy that depends only upon its location relative to the source of the force. This energy is called the potential energy - "potential" as it can easily be transformed into kinetic energy, energy associated with the object's motion: As the object yields to the pull or push of the force, its potential energy decreases while the energy associated with its motion increases.

  pressure
A measure for the strength of the resistance with which matter (for instance a gas) resists attempts to decrease the volume it occupies.
  primordial
In cosmology: At, from, or relating to the beginning (or at least the early phases) of the universe. For example, the primordial abundances of the chemical elements are the abundances right after Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, at a cosmic time of a few minutes.

  proton
Particle that carries positive electric charge and is comparatively massive; the atomic nuclei consist of protons and neutrons.

Protons are not elementary particles, they are compound particles consisting of quarks that are bound together through the strong nuclear interaction . Collectively, protons, neutrons and a number of similar particles are called baryons.

  PSR1913+16
A specific binary system consisting of two orbiting neutron stars, one of which is a pulsar from which we here on Earth receive regularly spaced radio pulses. From the point of view of general relativity, the system is interesting not only because, using the pulses, one can measure effects such as Shapiro delay with impressive precision, but because it has given us the first indirect proof for the existence of gravitational waves: the orbital period of the two stars becomes slightly shorter with each orbit, exactly in the way predicted by general relativity due to the energy the system radiates away in the form of gravitational waves.
pulsar
Rotating neutron star from which regular pulses of radiation reach the Earth. Behind those pulses is the fact that the pulsar sends out narrowly focussed beams of radiation that, due to the pulsar's rotation, sweep through space like the beam of a light-house. An animation illustrating this effect can be found on the page Neutron stars and pulsars in the chapter Black holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.

  Pythagoras' theorem
For a triangle in the plane (or in a more general flat space), two of whose sides form an angle of 90 degrees, the following holds: The lengths a and b of the two sides that form the 90 degrees angle and the length c of the third side are related by the formula

a2+b2=c2.

  quantize
First of all, quantization is the process by which from a classical theory is constructed the corresponding quantum theory. For instance, if you quantize classical electrodynamics, you will end up with its quantum version, quantum electrodynamics.

On the other hand, to be quantized means for a physical quantity to be divided into little building blocks or packets. For instance, in quantum theory, the energy of light is quantized: a given quantity of light consists of a finite number of energy packets called photons.

  quantum cosmology
According to the big bang models, the energy density of the very early universe was extremely high, with the contents of the observable universe compressed into a volume much smaller than that of an atomic nucleus. Under such circumstances, the effects of quantum physics and of general relativity should become equally important, in other words: This era of our cosmic evolution should be described using a theory of quantum gravity. Quantum cosmology encompasses all attempts to apply various candidate theories of quantum gravity to the physics of the early universe, and to describe the universe as a whole as a quantum system.

More information can be found in the spotlight topic Searching for the quantum beginning of the universe. Some quantum cosmological applications of loop quantum gravity can be found in the spotlight texts Avoiding the big bang and Taming infinities with loops.

  Quantum electrodynamics
Quantum theory of electromagnetic interactions. These interactions are described via the exchange of carrier particles called photons, for instance: when two electrons repel each other via the electromagnetic force, that influence is transmitted by photons flying back and forth between them.

Quantum electrodynamics is one facet of the standard model of particle physics. It is also the simplest example for a relativistic quantum field theory - a theory that is both a quantum theory and based on the principles of special relativity.

  quantum field theory, relativistic
Collective name for theories that are quantum theories based on the principles of special relativity. Typically, in relativistic quantum theory there exists for every species of particle a corresponding species of anti-particle; forces are transmitted by the exchange of carrier particles.

The simplest example of a relativistic quantum field theory is quantum electrodynamics.

  quantum mechanics
In a more general sense: synonymous with quantum theory. In a more restricted sense: The quantum theory of particles moving under the influence of forces - wherein the particles are described as quantum objects, while the forces are not. An important application of quantum mechanics is the physics of the electron shells of atoms ("atomic physics", for short). Attempts to extend the quantum laws to govern the forces themselves lead to relativistic quantum field theories.

  quantum particles
In classical physics, one can picture particles as little clumps of matter. At every time, such a clump has a definite location in space. In quantum theory, on the other hand, (quantum) particles are much more elusive. Their most complete descrition involves an abstract "state" that allows one to calculate probabilities, in particular: how likely it is to detect the particle, at a given time, at a given location.

  quantum theory
The framework for formulating the physical laws that govern the world at microscopic length-scales - the physics of the micro-world, for instance of atoms, atomic nuclei or elementary particles, but also the physics of ultra-precise measurements such as those made by gravitational wave detectors.

The laws of quantum theory are fundamentally different from our everyday experience and from those of classical physics.

The first unusual feature is that, in many cases, quantum theory merely allows statements about probabilities. For instance, in classical physics, one can assign to every particle, at every point in time, a location and a velocity. Whosoever can measure those quantities precisely can, in principle, predict where the particle in question can be found at every point in the future. In quantum theory, all one can assign to a system of particles is an abstract quantum state from which can be derived no precise predictions, but merely the probabilities for detecting a specific particle at a given time in a given place. Whether or not one will really find the particle at that location is governed by chance.

The second unusual feature is a fundamental restriction placed on the exactness of certain measurements (Heisenberg uncertainty relation). For instance, the more precise one measures a particle's location, the less definite any statements one can make about its velocity.

The third feature is how quantum theory came by its name: A number of physical quantities in nature come in little packets, in quanta. For instance, according to quantum theory, electromagnetic radiation is made of tiny quanta of energy called photons.

Examples for quantum theories are quantum mechanics and relativistic quantum field theories such as Quantum electrodynamics or other parts of the standard model of particle physics.

  quark-gluon-plasma
An exotic form of matter which was in all probability present in the early universe shortly after the big bang. Under ordinary circumstances, quarks only occur inside larger particles, such as protons or neutrons, tightly bound together as they are by the carrier particles of the strong nuclear force, which are called gluons. However, at extremely high densities and temperatures it is thought that these larger particles break up, creating a dense and strongly interacting soup of quarks and gluons - a quark-gluon-plasma.

It should be possible to create a quark-gluon-plasma artificially at particle accelerators; in fact, there are strong indications that particle physicists have managed to do just that using the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider.

  quasar
Class of active galactic nuclei. First noticed by radio astronomers as exceedingly bright radio sources that, in the night sky, did not appear more extended than ordinary stars - thus their name, a contractino of quasi-stellar radio source.

  radar
Abbreviation for "radio detection and ranging" - how to detect objects, and measure their distance, by means of sending out radio waves and detecting their reflection. Widely used in air and sea traffic; for general relativity, radar is of interest as radar signals reflected by planets can be used to measure the Shapiro delay - the fact that it takes those signals passing close to the sun a little longer to reach us than expected by classical physics.

  radiation
In a general sense: Collective name for all phenomena in which energy is transported through space in the form of waves or particles. In a more restricted sense, the word is often used synonymously with electromagnetic radiation.

  radio galaxy
One variety of the active galactic nuclei of young galaxies, whose central region radiates extremely great amounts of energy. Radio galaxies are distinguished by radiating off extremely high energies in the form of radio waves (more than 1035 Watt), from sources that are often located outside the visible part of those galaxies. Usually, the sources are radio bubbles, huge regions of gas whose radiation is stimulated by jets.

To the best of current knowledge, what's behind all that energy output is a supermassive black hole in the galactic core.

  radio waves
Variety of electromagnetic radiation with frequencies of a few thousand to a few billion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths of a few kilometres to a few centimetres. True to their name, these are the electromagnetic waves that bring radio and TV programs from the broadcast towers to our personal antennas and receivers. Cosmic radiowaves also make for interesting observations - see radio astronomy.

  recombination
In the early universe as described by the big bang models: transition that occurs at cosmic time around 300 000 years. At this point, the universe has cooled down sufficiently for atomic nuclei and electrons to form atoms - without immediately being ripped apart by electromagnetic radiation. The etymology of recombination does not quite correspond to the physics - this is not a re-combination, it is the first such combination in the universe as we know it. In the process, the cosmic background radiation decouples from the material universe.

  redshift
The frequency of a simple light wave is directly related to its colour (cf. spectrum). For the lowest frequencies of visible light, that colour is red. If the frequency of a light wave is shifted towards lower frequencies (for instance by the doppler shift), that corresponds to a colour shift towards the red end of the spectrum, and is hence called a redshift.

From this, "redshift" has come to acquire a more general meaning. It is used to denote any shift towards lower frequencies, even for types of electromagnetic radiation where the frequencies do not correspond to any visible colour, and more generally still, for other types of waves as well (for instance for gravitational waves).

In the context of general relativity, the gravitational and the cosmological redshift are of particular interest.

  redshift, gravitational
In general relativity, light moving away from a mass or other source of gravity experiences a shift towards lower frequencies. This is called the gravitational redshift; on the other hand, light falling towards a mass is blueshifted. Both effects together are called the gravitational frequency shift. The gravitational redshift is closely related to gravitational time dilation.

Information about an astrophysical application of this effect can be found in the spotlight text Gravitational redshift and White Dwarf stars.

  reference frame
Already in special relativity, motion is relative, and whenever there is talk about a moving clock, one must give the additional information: Moving relative to whom or what? Such a "whom or what", in other words: An object together with a recipe to determine locations relative to that object and to measure time, is called a reference frame.

In special relativity, there exists a special and very important class of reference frame, so-called inertial reference frames, in short: inertial frames.

  relativistic
Models, effects or phenomena in which special relativity or general relativity play a crucial role are called relativistic.

Examples are relativistic quantum field theories as theories based on special relativity, or the relativistic perihelion shift as a consequence of general relativity.

In addition, conditions under which the difference between relativistic physics and ordinary, classical physics are especially pronounced, are also called relativistic. For instance, when material objects reach speeds close to speed of light, one talks of relativistic speeds, while speeds that are so small compared to light as to make relativistic effects undetectably small are non-relativistic.

  Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
A particle accelerator operated by Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, New York. It brings heavy ions - the nuclei of atoms that have been stripped of all their electrons - into collision at high energies; the resulting states of matter give valuable information about the very early high temperature universe, and about the physics that should be included in the big bang models of relativistic cosmology.

RHIC webpages

  relativistic mass
One prediction of special relativity is that, the faster an object already is, the more difficult it is to accelerate it even further. One consequence of this is that it is impossible to accelerate a material object to the speed of light: The faster the object already is, the more force has to be used to increase its speed, and close to the speed of light, this effect becomes so strong that, finally, one would have to use infinite force to effect the final, decisive acceleration.

Traditionally, in classical physics, the resistance of an object to changes of its state of motion is its (inertial) mass. The relativistic mass of an object is defined in the same way, and the value an observer measures for this relativistic mass increases as an object moves faster and faster relative to that observer.

  relativity theory
The modern theories of space and time that go back to Albert Einstein: His special theory of relativity, which leaves out the effects of gravitation, and his general theory of relativity, in which gravitation makes itself felt as a distortion of space and time.

For an introduction to the basics of both theories of relativity, check out the chapters Special relativity and General relativity in Elementary Einstein.

  rest mass
In special relativity, the (inertial) mass of an object depends on how fast that object moves relative to the observer. The rest mass is the inertial mass of an object, measured by an observer relative to whom the object is at rest. With this definition, the rest mass is a kind of measure for how much matter is contained in a body.

  Ricci singularity
A type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary of spacetime) that is associated with infinitely high energy density.

More information about the different types of singularities can be found in the spotlight text Spacetime singularities.

  Schwarzschild black hole
A solution of Einstein's equations found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, which corresponds to a model universe that contains a single, spherically symmetric black hole.

More precisely, the Schwarzschild solution is a whole family of solutions: Schwarzschild's formulae contain a free parameter m corresponding to the mass of the black hole. To each concrete value of m corresponds one specific solution to Einstein's equations, a space-time containing a spherically symmetric black hole of mass m.

The Schwarzschild solution is of practical importance as the outlying regions of the corresponding model universe describe the space-time distortion around all kinds of objects that are spherically symmetric, or nearly so, such as the sun or the earth (cf. Birkhoff's theorem).

  Schwarzschild radius
A measure for the size of a spherically symmetric black hole. It is defined using the area of the black hole's horizon: In usual high school geometry (the geometry of flat space), radius and area of a spherical surface are related as

area = 4 times pi times (radius)2.

The Schwarzschild radius is defined indirectly by the formula
Area of the black hole's horizon = 4 times pi times (Schwarzschild radius)2.

It is directly proportional to the black hole's mass. The Schwarzschild radius for an object the mass of the earth is 9 millimeters, for an object with the mass of the sun, 2.95 kilometers.

There is a quite general result that says: If a sphere of matter is compressed further and further, a black hole forms as soon as the sphere's radius gets smaller than the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the matter's mass.

  second
In the International System of units: the basic unit of time. Defined as a certain multiple of the oscillation period of electromagnetic radiation set free in a certain transition within the electron shell of atoms of the type Cesium-133.

  shear
Generically, an extended body in free fall will experience deformation due to tidal effects. For instance, in a body falling towards Earth, those parts that are slightly closer to the Earth will experience a slightly stronger gravitational pull than parts which are further away. Some of the deformation will change the body's volume. The shear is that part of the deformation which does not change the volume, only the body's shape.

Some examples for shear can be found in the spotlight text Of singularities and breadmaking.

  SI
The international system of physical units, introduced in 1960. It is based on seven fundamental units; in the context of Einstein Online, the interesting ones are the meter as a measure of length and distance, the second as the unit of time, the kilogram as the unit of mass and the Kelvin as the unit of temperature.

By multiplication and division, the seven fundamental units can be used to construct derived units for all other physical quantities. For instance, the unit of speed is the distance unit divided by the unit of time, meter per second.


sine
The sine, written sin(x), is a mathematical function that is perfectly regular and repetitive, with maximal and minimal values following each other in endless procession. The function is plotted here:

Sinuskurve
Sine waves are the simplest waves imaginable, with crests and valleys following each other in exactly the way described by a sine function.

  singularity
Irregular boundary of space-time in general relativity - region where space-time simply comes to an end. Often, such boundaries are associated with space-time curvature growing beyond all bounds and becoming infinitely large - so-called curvature singularities (notably Ricci singularities or Weyl singularities) - but there are exceptions (for instance a conic singularities).

According to general relativity, there exists a singularity inside every black hole, and the starting point of any universe described by a big bang model is a singularity, as well. The occurence of sinularities is a failure of general relativity - and a strong indication that the theory is incomplete. Instead, one such describe the earliest universe and the interior of black holes using a theory of quantum gravity.

More information about singularities can be found in the spotlight texts Spacetime singularities and Of singularities and breadmaking.

  singularity theorems
Theorems, proved by Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking, that state under which circumstances singularities are inevitable in general relativity. As the theorems assume the laws of general relativity and certain general properties of matter, but nothing else, they are valid quite generally. In particular, these theorems prove that, in the frame-work of general relativity, every black hole must contain a singularity, and every expanding universe like ours must have begun in a big bang singularity.

  solar mass
The sun has a mass of 1.989·1030 kilograms.

[Problems reading expressions such as 1030? See exponential notation.]

In astronomy, the solar mass is frequently used as a unit of mass ("Neutron stars typically have a mass of 1.4 solar masses").

  solar system
Our cosmic neighbourhood, consisting of a star - the sun -, nine planets orbiting the sun, numerous smaller bodies, dust and gas.

In the context of relativity, the solar system is interesting as a natural laboratory in which the prediction of general relativity can be tested - in particular those that differ from the predictions of classical, Newtonian gravity. Examples are the relativistic perihelion shift of planetary orbits, the deflection of light close to the sun and the Shapiro effect.

  solid state
State of matter in which the atoms or molecules are bound so tightly to each other so that they form a solid, stable lump. In contrast with fluids, whose form adapts to whatever container they are placed in, solid bodies keep their form.

Compare the other states of matter: liquid, gas, plasma.

  solution
In the context of general relativity: a solution or, more precisely, a solution of the Einstein equations is a model universe that follows the law of gravity as prescribed by general relativity.
  space
In a strict sense: Space as we know it from everyday life: the totality of all locations in which objects can sit, with three dimensions.

In a more general sense used by mathematicians, all kinds of sets of points are spaces - a line for instance, which has but a single dimension, or a two-dimensional surface, but also higher-dimensional spaces. Also, in such more general spaces, geometry can be different from the standard Euclidean geometry taught in high schools - such spaces can be curved.

  space-time
Already in special relativity, observer in motion relative each other will not, in general, agree as to whether two events happen simultaneously, or as to how great is the distance between two objects. They do, however, agree as to what events there are, although not to when and where they happen. This observer-independent totality of all events is called space-time. How space-time is split into space and time can differ from observer to observer.

Every-day space has three dimensions. Adding time adds another dimension - space-time has four dimensions, all in all.

We are used to the notion of a point in space - an object with but a single location, defined completely once its space coordinates are given. In spacetime, a spacetime point is an object defined completely once its space coordinates and its time coordinate are given - which makes a space-time point nothing but an elementary event.

The idea of space-time is, in addition to its role in special relativity, a building block of general relativity. Analogous to how a plane is flat, but the surface of a sphere is curved, in general relativity, curved or distorted versions of the simple, flat space-time of special relativity play a role. Space-time curvature, in general relativity, is intimately connected with gravity.

For an introduction to the basics of both theories of relativity, check out the chapters Special relativity and General relativity in Elementary Einstein. Sometimes, it can be helpful to view space-time in analogy to ordinary space - such analogies are explored in the spotlight topics Time dilation on the road (for time dilation) and Twins on the road (for the twin effect).

  special relativity
Albert Einstein's theory of the fundamentals of space, time, and movement (but not gravity). For a brief introduction, check out the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein.

Selected aspects of special relativity are described in the category Special relativity of our Spotlights on relativity.

  spectrum
The electromagnetic radiation reaching us from an astronomical object or other source is a mix of electromagnetic waves with a great variety of frequencies. The spectrum lists the composition of this mix: For every frequency, it states the amount of radiation energy contributed by waves of that particular frequency.

  speed
An object's average speed is the distance it moves during a given period of time, divided by the length of the time interval. If you make the time interval infinitely small, the result is the object's speed at one particular moment in time. The notion of speed can be applied to waves in different ways; for instance, for a simple wave, the phase speed is the speed at which any given wave crest or wave through propagates through space.

Cf. the more general entry velocity.

  speed of light
The speed at which light or, more generally, electromagnetic radiation propagates through space (especially: through empty space). Central quantity in special relativity: There, the constancy of the speed of light is a basic postulate: ever observer (more precisely: every inertial observer) that measures the speed of light in a vacuum obtains the same constant value, c=299,792,458 metres per second.

Another important relativistic aspect of the speed of light is that it defines an absolute upper speed limit: In special relativity, nothing can move faster than light, and information or influence at most be transmitted at light-speed. In general relativity, the same law is in force locally: No object, no matter, no information can directly overtake or catch up with light (cf. causality).

Basic information about the role of light speed in special relativity can be found in the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein.

  sphere
A spherical surface is a simple example for a curved surface. It is easily pictured as a surface embedded in three-dimensional space: in space, a spherical surface is the set of all points at a certain fixed distance from a given point (the point being the centre of the sphere). Mathematically, a spherical surface can be described without recourse to three-dimensional space - when mathematicians talk of the geometry of such a surface, they (almost) always mean the "inner geometry": Those properties of the surface noticeable to two-dimensional beings, living and working in that surface, capable of measuring distances and angles in it.

Sphere is regularly used as a synonym for spherical surface (instead of describing a solid, three-dimensional ball). And not only for the two-dimensional spherical surface described above, but also for its analogues in lower and higher dimensions. A one-sphere, for instance, is the same as a circle, a two-sphere is the spherical surface defined above, a three-sphere its three-dimensional analogue.

  spin
Fundamental quantum property of elementary as well as of compound particles. For elementary particles, the spin determines whether the particle is a matter particle (half-integer spin such as 1/2, 3/2, 5/2 etc.) or a force particle (integer spin such as 0, 1, 2 etc.).

  spin network
In loop quantum gravity (one of the candidates for a theory of quantum gravity), the underlying microscopic structure of space is a spin network - a graph consisting of lines and nodes where each line is assigned a label consisting of a half-integer number. Mathematically, that number is closely connected with the spin of elementary particles.

More information about spin networks can be found in the spotlight topic The fabric of space: spin networks.

  standard acceleration
The acceleration imparted by the earth's gravitation to a body located on the earth's surface: If you raise such a body up a bit and let it fall, it will accelerate 9.81 meters per second2 (32.17 feet per second2), in other words: in every second, its speed will increase by 9.81 meters per second (32.17 feet per second).

Standard acceleration, abbreviated as g, is often used as a measure for accelerations. For instance, an acceleration of 2 g corresponds to 2·9.81=19.62 meters per second2.

  star
A cosmic gas ball that is massive enough for pressure and temperatur in its core to reach values where self-sustained nuclear fusion reactions set in. The energy set free in these reactions makes stars into very bright sources of light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation.

Once the nuclear fuel is exhausted, the star becomes a white dwarf, a neutron star or a black hole.

  states (of matter)
Depending on parameters like temperature or pressure, one and the same portion of matter can occur in different states with greatly varying physical properties. The most important states of matter are the solid, liquid, gaseous and plasma states (the latter three forms of matter are also called fluid). At very low temperatures, atoms bind together to form a solid body with a definite shape. As temperature increases, many solid bodies melt, giving a liquid or, at even higher temperatures, a gas, an ensemble of atoms and/or molecules scurrying wildly to and fro. With a further increase in temperature, a plasma state can be reached, atoms desintegrating into atomic nuclei and electrons.

  stationary
Roughly speaking, in relativity, a situation or a spacetime is stationary if there is no change over time.

To be more precise, one has to take into account that, in general relativity, time can be defined in many different ways, all of them equally valid for formulating the laws of physics. This leads to a modified definition: A situation or a spacetime is stationary if it is possible to define time in a way so that there is no change over time - if you follow the properties of a given region of space over time, they will not change.

  Stefan-Boltzmann law
One of the laws governing the properties of the simplest form of thermal radiation - that emitted by a blackbody: The total energy emitted by such a body is proportional to the fourth power of its temperature (measured in Kelvin).

  stellar black holes
Stellar black holes are black holes with between a few and a dozen solar masses that are formed when the core of a massive star collapses.

Basic information about black holescan be found in the chapter Black holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.

  straight line
In the plane, in three-dimensional everyday space or in more general flat spaces: Any line that forms the shortest connection between two given points.

In the space-time of special relativity: The world-line of an object moving with constant speed on a path that is straight in space.

  string(s), string theory
Candidate for a theory of quantum gravity; a quantum theory, where the fundamental building blocks are tiny, one-dimensional, oscillating entities, called strings.

A brief description can be found on the page String theory in the chapter  Relativity and the quantum of Elementary Einstein.

  sun
The central (and most massive) body of our solar system; the star closest to us; a ball of gas with a radius of 700000 km and a mass of 1.989·1030 kilograms.

[Problems reading expressions such as 1030? See exponential notation.]

In the interior of the sun, nuclear fusion processes run their course; they are responsible for the sun's impressive brightness.

  supergravity
Class of modells that generalize Einstein's general theory of relativity in a way that satisfies the requirements of supersymmetry.

Today, supergravity is of interest in the context of string theory: In the limiting case of low energies (where low energies includes everything accessible with modern particle accelerators), the physics of string theories can be described with the help of certain supergravity models.

  supermassive black holes
are black holes with masses of more than a million solar masses. As far as we know, such holes can be found in the central regions of almost all galaxies. Central black holes are the energy source for radio galaxies and other active galactic nuclei.

Basic informations about black holes in general can be found in the chapter Black holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.

  supernova
Highly energetic explosion that ends the life of stars with more than about ten solar masses. In this explosion, the outer layers of the stars are ejected into space, while the core regions collapse to form a neutron star or even a black hole.

  superstring theory
Synonym: supersymmetric string theory. String theory that satisfies the requirements of an abstract symmetry called superymmetry. All models of string theory that are realistic candidates for a theory of quantum gravity, are superstring theories.

  supersymmetry
Abstract symmetrie that some of the models of particle physics satisfy: in such models, for every species of particles, there is a partner species with the same mass. If the particles are matter particles (fermions), then the partner particles are force particles (bosons), and vice versa.

 surface
Geometric space with two dimensions. Examples include the plane or the surface of a sphere.
  symmetry
A situation has a symmetry if certain changes make no difference. For instance: a mirror-symmetric image that you view in a mirror looks the same. A perfect sphere looks the same, even if it is rotated around an arbitrary axis through its centre point ("spherical symmetry").

In particle physics, there are more abstract symmetries, less readily pictured, such as supersymmetry.

  synchrotron
A particle accelerator, in which particles are accelerated with the help of electric fields, while strong magnetic fields keep them on track (the fact that ever-stronger magnetic fields are needed as acceleration proceeds is a consequence of the fact that relativistic mass increases with speed.)

  synchrotron radiation
Electromagnetic radiation produced when electrically charged particles (for instance, electrons) are made to follow a curved trajectory in a particle accelerator, or when these particles undergo comparable accelerations in nature.

Due to effects that can be derived from special relativity, synchrotron radiation is densely concentrated and very intense. These properties, together with the fact that it is very easy to produce synchrotron radiation with a clearly defined frequency, make this type of radiation a valuable tool for research not only in basic physics, but also in biology and medicine.

When it was first discovered, synchrotron radiation was an (annoying!) side effect, observable at particle accelerators which were used for research into the basic properties of elementary particles. Nowadays, there many accelerators whose main purposes is the production of this radiation! One of them can be seen on the page E=mc2 in the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein: the VUV ring at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Here are some links to the webpages of some synchrotron radiation laboratories:

National Synchrotron Light Source at the Brookhaven National Laboratory
Hamburg Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (HASYLAB)

  temperature
In systems consisting of many particles, be they solid bodies, fluids or gases, the constitutents are in constant, chaotic motion: the atoms in a solid crystal oscillate a bit, the molecules of a gas are in rapid, disordered motion, and so on. The average energy with which each constitutent contributes to every part of the disorderly motion is the same, and it is called the temperature of the system. High average energy corresponds to high temperature - atoms vibrating wildly, gas molecules zipping around very fast -, low average energy to low temperature.

In a slightly different context, certain mixtures of electromagnetic radiation can be assigned a temperature ("radiation temperature"), a single parameter that completely defines the basic properties of the radiation (more precisely, its spectrum). It corresponds to the thermal radiation emitted by a hot body with precisely that temperature.

In physics, temperature is measured in Kelvin, in everyday life, depending on the country, in Fahrenheit or Celsius.

  thermal energy
The energy contained in the disordered motion of a body's constituents - for instance, the energy of the disorderly motion of the atoms or molecules of a gas, or their oscillation in a solid body. If one increases a body's thermal energy, one also raises its temperature.

  thermal motion
What we call heat in everday life corresponds to disordered motion of the microscopically small constituents of matter (say, atoms or molecules) - one example being the chaotic dance of the molecules making up a gas, another the oscillation of the molecules forming a solid body. This disordered motion is called thermal motion, and its average energy defines a system's temperature (cf. the preceeding entry on thermal energy).

  thermal radiation
In a narrow sense: synonym for infrared radiation.

In a more general sense: The electromagnetic radiation emitted by every body with non-zero temperature due to the laws of thermodynamics. The properties of this radiation (in particular: its spectrum) depend on the body's temperature - in the simplest case, that of what is called a blackbody, they even depend on nothing but the temperature and some universal constants.

For everyday temperatures, such as those of a hotplate, thermal radiation is emitted mainly in the form of infrared radiation. At higher temperatures, significant amounts of visible light are emitted, as well: a hotplate that is very hot indeed looks dark red or even light red; molten metal looks yellow or even white. In more extreme situations, thermal radiation can have energies that are even higher - for instance, the gases in the accretion discs of black holes are so hot that they emit great amounts of thermal radiation in the x-ray region.

  thermodynamic equilibrium
A physical system is in thermodynamic equilibrium if its energy is distributed evenly among all the different ways in which its components can move or vibrate - what physicists call the system's "degrees of freedom". The average energy per degree of freedom is a direct measure of the system's temperature.

For example, for a gas, the kinetic energy of all its many particles is, on average, the same.

The totality of all electromagnetic fields is a physical system as well. More information about how thermal equilibrium of a hot body and the electromagnetic fields leads to the emission of thermal radiation can be found in the spotlight text Heat that meets the eye.

The situation is slightly more complicated in systems that allows transmutations - for instance a system consisting of particles of species A and particles of another species B, where A-particles can change into B-particles and the other way around, For such a system, equilibrium at a certain temperature implies definite values for the relative abundances of the different particle species - how many particles of species A there should be, on average, for each particle of another species B. Such equilibria are of great importance for the physics of the early universe, as described by the big bang models.

  tidal effects
Idealized situations apart, the gravitational influences acting on an object depend on the object's position. Take two small objects in the neighbourhood of a massive body: If one of them is closer to the massive body, it will be subject to a stronger gravitational pull. All effects that can be traced back to this variation of gravitational influences from location to location are called tidal effects.

Whenever gravitation is regarded as a force (notably in Newton's theory of gravity), tidal effects are caused by minute force differences - differences in the strength and direction of the gravitational force at one point in space, as compared to a neighbouring point. These force differences, in turn, are called tidal forces.

The best-known example for tidal effects is the one responsible for their name: High tide and low tide at the sea-shore are caused by position-dependent variations of the gravitational force - very roughly speaking, the oceans on the side of the earth facing the moon are pulled towards that heavenly body more strongly than the solid globe of the earth, and that globe in turn feels a stronger pull than the oceans on the side facing away from the moon.

In the context of general relativity, tidal forces are especially interesting where singularities are concerned - in fact, the theory predicts that regions near a singularity are dominated by very strong and rapidly changing tidal forces (for more information on this, see the spotlight text Of singularities and breadmaking.

  time
It is a fact of life that not all events in our universe happen concurrently - instead, there is a certain order. Defining a time coordinate or defining time, the way physicists do it, is to define a prescription to associate with each event a number so as to reflect that order - if event B happens after event A, then the number associated with B should be larger than that associated with A. The first step of this definition is to construct a clock: Choose a simple process that repeats regularly. (What is "regular"? Luckily, in our universe, all elementary processes such as a swinging pendulum, the oscillations of atoms or of electronic circuits lead to the same concept of regularity.) As a second step, install a counter: A mechanism that, with every repetition of the chosen process, raises the count by one.

With this definition, one can at least assign a time (the numerical value of the counter) to events happening at location of the clock. For events at different locations, an additional definition is necessary: One needs to define simultaneity. After all, the statement that some far-away event A happens at 12 o'clock is the same as saying that event A and "our clock counter shows 12:00:00" are simultaneous. The how and why of defining simultaneity - a centre-piece of Einstein's special theory of relativity - are described in the spotlight topic Defining "now".

With all these preparations, physicists can, in principle, assign a time coordinate value ("a time") to any possible events, and describes how fast or how slow processes happen, compared to that time coordinate.

  time dilation
In special relativity: From the point of view of an observer (more precisely: an inertial observer), a moving clock goes slower than an identically built clock at rest. All other processes moving alongside the clock (for instance: everything happening aboard a rocket speeding by) are slowed down in an identical fashion.

Time dilation can be mutual: When two inertial observers speed past each other, each will find that the other's clocks go slower.Some aspects of this unfamiliar mutuality are explored in the spotlight topic The dialectic of relativity; a geometric analogy is presented in Time dilation on the road.

In general relativity, there is the phenomenon of gravitational time dilation: Roughly speaking, clocks in the vicinity of a mass or other source of gravity run more slowly than clocks which are farther away. This phenomenon is closely related to the gravitational redshift.

  torus
A torus (pl. tori) is a surface shaped like that of a donut or bagel:

Surface shaped like a donut or bagel
It is possible to define analogous geometric objects, all of them finite in extent and closed in upon themselves, with more dimensions than two. These are also known as tori; whenever it is necessary to indicate such an object's dimensionality, one can simply add a qualifier to the name: The donut surface is a two-torus (two-dimensional), its three-dimensional analogue is a three-torus, and so on.

  transversal
A wave is called transversal if the effects associated with it (the electric forces associated with an electromagnetic wave, or the space distortions caused by a gravitational wave) act only in directions perpendicular to the wave's direction of propagation. For gravitational waves, some more information about this property can be found in the spotlight text The wave nature of gravitational waves.

  triangle
In a plane and other flat space: Geometrical object consisting of three points ("vertices") with three connecting straight lines.

The definition can be made more general, in a way that applies to curved spaces, as well: A geometric object consisting of three points ("vertices") connected by three segments of geodesics.

  tritium
Variety of hydrogen in which the atomic nucleus contains two neutrons and a proton. In ordinary hydrogen, the nucleus consists of a single proton; in heavy hydrogen (deuterium) there is one additional neutron.

In the context of general relativity, tritium is of interest as one of the species of light atomic nuclei that formed in the early universe during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis.

  tunnel effect
A quantum mechanical phenomenon that can be pictured as follows. Imagine a ball rolling towards a hill:

Image of hill, ball rolling towards hill
Leaving quantum effects aside (in other words, in classical physics), we expect that what happens depends on the ball's energy: If the ball moves fast enough (i.e. has sufficient energy), it will climb the hill, pass the peak at B and roll down on the other side. If the ball is too slow, it will reach some maximum height and then begin to roll back down without having passed B.

In the analogous situation for a quantum particle, there is another possibility. Even an incoming particle with enough energy to climb to the height A, but not to pass the peak B, can appear on the right-hand side of the hill at point C and continue onwards. Such a transition is called tunneling - it is as if the particle had taken a secret tunnel from A to C to avoid the forbidden peak around B and arrive directly at C.

More generally, tunneling describes any transition from a state A to a state C that a quantum system can make, but that is forbidden to analogous systems in classical physics, since there, getting from A to C would only be possible by passing through a forbidden state B.

  twin effect
Effect of special relativity, variant of the time dilation effect: A twin that uses a high-powered rocket to travel in space with a speed near that of light before returning ages less than his twin sibling that has remained on Earth.

The question why this is sometimes thought to be a paradox, while it really isn't, is explored in the spotlight topic The case of the travelling twins; a geometric analogy that is not about time, but about distance, is developed in Twins on the road.

  ultraviolet
Variety of electromagnetic radiation with frequencies between a few and a few hundred quadrillion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths between a few hundred and a few billionths of metres. Known in everyday life as that part of the radiation we receive from the sun that causes our skin to tan

  unified field theory
Collective designation for Einstein's unsuccessful attempts to formulate a theory in which gravity and other interactions, notably electromagnetism, are described in a unified manner - a theory in which gravity and electromagnetism would be no more than different facets of one and the same underlying structure, in the same manner in which magnetism and the electrostatic force are facets of a more general description of electromagnetism.

After Einstein, quite a number of scientists have searched for a unified description of all interactions; the best-known modern incarnation of the idea of unification is string theory.

  uniqueness
Given a set of physical laws, one interesting class of question is aimed at finding out the variety of situations those laws allow. For example, is there only a single kind of rotating black hole, or do the laws of general relativity admit an infinite variety of such objects? Theorems addressing this kind of question are generally known as uniqueness theorems - in their purest form, they state that, given a certain set of physical laws and a certain set of additional conditions, there is no more than one configuration of spacetime and matter that fits the bill.

In general relativity, the most famous such theorems are the black hole uniqueness theorems. They are explored in the spotlight text How many different kinds of black hole are there? A different aspect of the question of uniqueness is addressed in the spotlight text The many ways of building an empty, unchanging universe.

  velocity
In physics, velocity is a combination of two aspects: First of all, how fast an object is, in other words: how long a distance it moves in a given time (its "speed"). Secondly, the direction in which an object moves. Physicists combine these two informations into a single mathematical object, called a "vector", and this is what is called the velocity. For instance, when a car goes around a curve with 100 miles per hour, its speed is constant, but as it changes its direction of movement, its velocity changes correspondingly.

  visible light
In astronomy, the word light is often used to denote any kind of electromagnetic radiation, from infrared radiation to X-rays and beyond. If, in contrast, an astronomer is talking about the ordinary light to which our eyes are susceptible - electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths between about 400 and 700 nanometers (400 to 700 billionths of a meter) - he or she will use the expression "visible light".

  wave
In a general sense: any travelling pattern, whether or not it involves matter being transported as well. Simple examples are water-waves - wave crests and troughs travelling over a water surface, and a Mexican wave in a football stadium, with fans alternately standing up and sitting down - the pattern moves throught the stadium, not the fans themselves.

An especially simple form for a wave is a sinus wave, a regular pattern of wave crests and troughs.

  wavelength
For simple wave where maxima and minima, wave crests and troughs follow each other with perfect regularity, one can define a characteristic wave-length: the never-changing distance between one wave-crest and the next.

  weak force
One of the basic interactions in the standard model of particle physics. It is responsible for certain radioactive decays, such as the one where a neutron is transformed into a proton, sending out an electron and a neutrino.

  weightlessness
From everyday life, we're used to the Earth's gravity pulling every body down to the ground, and the strength of that force is called its weight. If no such force is present, then bodies placed at a certain location in space simply stay where they are, even without any support. Whenever that is the case, we are in a situation of weightlessness.

There are two types of situation in which weightlessness occurs. First of all, one could move far, far away into space, distancing oneself from all massive bodies so far that their gravitational influence becomes negligible. This would be a truly gravity-free situation. The second type of situation is more common. In free fall - be it an elevator plunging to earth, be it a space-station like the ISS in orbit around the Earth - bodies are weightless. The fact that, at least locally, there is no way to distinguish between these two types of weightlessness is embodied in the equivalence principle, one of the fundamental building blocks of the general theory of relativity.

  Weyl singularity
A type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary of spacetime) that is associated with infinitely strong tidal forces.

More information about the different types of singularities can be found in the spotlight text Spacetime singularities.

  White dwarf
When stars with up to ten solar masses have exhausted the fuel of light atomic nuclei they need to sustain nuclear fusion reactions, they collaps to form a White Dwarf: a comparatively small ball of gas, prevented from further collapse by a quantum mechanical phenomenon, the so-called degeneracy pressure of its electrons.

One way of determining the masses of White Dwarfs uses an effect of general relativity, namely the gravitational redshift - more information about this can be found in the spotlight text Gravitational redshift and White Dwarf stars.

  Wien's law
One of the laws governing the properties of the simplest form of thermal radiation - that emitted by a blackbody: the product of such a body's temperature (measured in Kelvin) and the wavelength at which it emits maximal amounts of energy is a universal constant.
world-line
The path of a pointlike object in four-dimensional space-time is a line called the object's world-line. To every moment in time corresponds one point of that world-line giving the position of the object in space at that particular moment.

  X-ray astronomy
Branch of physics devoted to the observation of X-rays reaching us from the depths of space. Such radiation is typically produced as the thermal radiation of matter at extremely high temperatures - an important example are the hot gases in the accretion disc of a black hole.

  X-rays
Highly energetic electromagnetic waves with frequencies between a few hundred Quadrillions and a few hundred Quintillions of oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths of a few billionths to a few trillionths of a metre. Most people know of these ray's medical applications - with their help, one can produce images of the interior of human bodies - however, they are also used in (X-ray) astronomy.

  XMM Newton
Satellite project of the European space agency ESA. Launched in December 1999, XMM Newton is a space-based X-ray telescope; as such it is especially suited for research on the luminous phenomena associated with black holes.
A[edit]
Abbe number –
Absolute electrode potential –
Absolute humidity – The ratio of water vapor in a sample of air to the volume of the sample
Absolute magnitude –
Absolute motion –
Absolute pressure –
Absolute scale –
Absolute zero – The theoretical lowest possible temperature. More formally, it is the theoretical temperature at which entropy reaches its minimum value.
Absorption spectroscopy –
Absorptivity –
Accelerating universe –
Acceleration – The rate at which the velocity of a body changes with time
Acceleration due to gravity – The acceleration on an object caused by force of gravitation
Accelerometer – The device which is used to measure the proper acceleration of the body irrespective of other forces.
Acoustics – The branch of physics dealing with the production, transmission and effects produced by sound
Adhesion – The tendency of dissimilar particles or surfaces to cling to one another
Adiabatic cooling –
Adiabatic heating –
Aerodynamics –
Afocal system –
Air mass –
Air mass (astronomy) –
Air mass (solar energy) –
Albedo – The fraction of the total light incident on a reflecting surface, especially a celestial body, which is reflected back in all directions
Alloy – The mixture of metal with other metal or other elements.
Alpha particle – Consist of two protons and two neutrons bound together into a particle identical to a helium nucleus, which is classically produced in the process of alpha decay, but may be produced also in other ways and given the same name.
Alternating current – A form of electric current in which the movement of electric charge periodically reverses direction.
Alternative hypothesis –
Ammeter – An instrument that is used to measure current.
Amorphous solid – Its a type solid which do not have definite geometrical shape. Or its non-crystalline solid.
Ampere – A unit that describes the rate of flow of electricity (current).
Amplifier –
Amplitude – Height of a wave measured from its center (normal) position. For example, the height of a water wave above the level of calm water.
Angle of incidence –
Angle of reflection –
Angstrom – Its an unit of linear measurement for measuring micro-particles. It's denoted by Å and its value is 10^-10 m or 10^-8 cm.
Angular acceleration –
Angular displacement –
Angular frequency –
Angular momentum –
Angular velocity –
Anion – negatively charged ion
Annihilation –
Anode – It's a positive terminal of a battery.It's denoted by symbol(+).
Antigravity –
Antimatter –
Antineutron –
Antiparticle –
Antiproton –
Arc length –
Archimedes' principle –
Area moment of inertia –
Astronomical unit –
Astrophysics – The branch of astronomy that deals with the physics of the universe, especially with "the nature of the heavenly bodies, rather than their positions or motions in space
Attenuation coefficient –
Atom – A basic unit of matter that consists of a dense central nucleus surrounded by a cloud of negatively charged electrons. The atomic nucleus contains a mix of positively charged protons and electrically neutral neutrons
Atomic line filter –
Atomic mass –
Atomic mass unit – one-twelfth the mass of an atom of the isotope ?12/6C
Atomic number – The number of protons found in the nucleus of an atom. Represented by the letter "Z," it is most often used to classify elements (see periodic table)
Atomic orbital –
Atomic packing factor –
Atomic physics –
Atomic structure –
Atomic weight – Atomic weight is the sum number of proton (or electron) and number of neutron of an atom.It is denoted by A.
Audio frequency –
Average speed –
Avogadro constant –
Avogadro's Law - it states that volumes of gases which are equal to each other at the same temperature and pressure will contain equal numbers of molecules.
Avogadro's Number – the number of molecules in exactly 12g of carbon-12, equaling 6.022 x 1023.
B[edit]
Babinet's principle – A theorem concerning diffraction that states that the diffraction pattern from an opaque body is identical to that from a hole of the same size and shape except for the overall forward beam intensity.
Background radiation – The ubiquitous ionising radiation that the general population is exposed to.
Balmer series –
Barometer – A scientific instrument used in meteorology to measure atmospheric pressure. Pressure tendency can forecast short term changes in the weather.
Battery –Battery is combination of two or more cell(electric),which produces electricity.
Beam – A structural element that is capable of withstanding load primarily by resisting bending.Beams are traditionally descriptions of building or civil engineering structural elements, but smaller structures such as truck or automobile frames, machine frames, and other mechanical or structural systems contain beam structures that are designed and analyzed in a similar fashion.
Bending – (also known as flexure) The behavior of a slender structural element subjected to an external load applied perpendicularly to a longitudinal axis of the element.
Bending moment –
Bernoulli equation –
Bernoulli's principle –
Bessel function –
Beta particle – High-energy, high-speed electrons or positrons emitted by certain types of radioactive nuclei.
Big Bang – The prevailing cosmological model that describes the early development of the Universe.
Binary star – A binary star is a star system consisting of two stars orbiting around their common centre of mass.
Binding energy – The mechanical energy required to disassemble a whole into separate parts. A bound system typically has a lower potential energy than the sum of its constituent parts.
Binomial random variable –
Biocatalysis –
Biophysics – An interdisciplinary science using methods of, and theories from, physics to study biological systems
Black hole – A region of space-time where gravity prevents anything, including light, from escaping.
Black-body radiation – The type of electromagnetic radiation within or surrounding a body in thermodynamic equilibrium with its environment, or emitted by a black body (an opaque and non-reflective body) held at constant, uniform temperature. The radiation has a specific spectrum and intensity that depends only on the temperature of the body.
Block and tackle – A system of two or more pulleys with a rope or cable threaded between them, usually used to lift or pull heavy loads.
Bohr model –
Boiling point – The temperature at which a liquid is changed into a gas; the vapour pressure of liquid and gas are equal at this temperature
Boiling point elevation –
Boltzmann constant –
Bose-Einstein condensate –
Boson – One of two classes of elementary particles, the other being fermions. An important characteristic of bosons is that there is no limit to the number that can occupy the same quantum state.
Boyle's law – The volume of a given mass of a gas at constant temperature is inversely proportional to the pressure
Bra–ket notation –
Bragg's law –
Brewster's angle –
British thermal unit – A traditional unit of energy equal to about 1055 joules. It is the amount of energy needed to heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit. In scientific contexts the Btu has largely been replaced by the SI unit of energy, the joule.
Brittle – A material is brittle if, when subjected to stress, it breaks without significant Brittle materials absorb relatively little energy prior to fracture, even those of high strength. Breaking is often accompanied by a snapping sound.
Brownian motion – The presumably random moving of particles suspended in a fluid (liquid or gas) resulting from their bombardment by the fast-moving atoms or molecules in the gas or liquid. Also called pedesis
Bulk modulus – A measure of a substance's resistance to uniform compression. It is defined as the ratio of the infinitesimal pressure increase to the resulting relative decrease of the volume. Its base unit is the pascal.
Buoyancy – An upward force exerted by a fluid, that opposes the weight of an immersed object.
C[edit]
Calculus – The mathematical study of change that has two major branches: differential calculus (concerning rates of change and slopes of curves), and integral calculus (concerning accumulation of quantities and the areas under and between curves); these two branches are related to each other by the fundamental theorem of calculus.
Capacitance –
Capacitive reactance –
Carnot cycle –
Cartesian coordinates –
Cathode – An electrode through which electric current flows out of a polarized electrical device. The direction of electric current is, by convention, opposite to the direction of electron flow. Therefore the electrons flow into the polarized electrical device and out of, for example, the connected electrical circuit.
Cathode ray –
Celsius scale – A scale and unit of measurement for temperature, also known as Centigrade.
Center of curvature –
Center of gravity – The point in a body around which the resultant torque due to gravity forces vanish. Near the surface of the earth, where the gravity acts downward as a parallel force field, the center of gravity and the center of mass are the same.
Center of mass – A distribution of mass in space is the unique point where the weighted relative position of the distributed mass sums to zero.
Center of pressure –
Centigrade – A scale and unit of measurement for temperature, also known as Celsius
Central force motion –
Central limit theorem –
Centrifugal force – ("center fleeing") The apparent outward force that draws a rotating body away from the centre of rotation. It is caused by the inertia of the body as the body's path is continually redirected.
Centripetal force – ("center seeking") A force which keeps a body moving with a uniform speed along a circular path and is directed along the radius towards the centre.
Chain reaction – A sequence of reactions where a reactive product or by-product causes additional similar reactions to take place.
Change of base rule –
Charles's law –
Chemical Physics – A subdiscipline of chemistry and physics that investigates physicochemical phenomena using techniques from atomic and molecular physics and condensed matter physics; it is the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
Circle – A simple shape of Euclidean geometry that is the set of all points in a plane that are at a given distance from a given point, the centre.
Circular motion –
Classical mechanics – A sub-field of mechanics that is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.
Coherence –
Cold fusion –
Complex harmonic motion –
Compton scattering –
Concave lens –
Condensation point –
Condensed matter physics – A branch of physics that deals with the physical properties of condensed phases of matter
Conservation of momentum –
Constructive interference –
Continuous spectrum –
Convection – The transfer of heat by the actual transfer of matter
Convex lens –
Coulomb – The SI derived unit of electric charge. It is defined as the charge transported by a steady current of one ampere in one second.
Coulomb's law –
Continuum mechanics –
Cosmic background radiation –
Cosmic rays –
Covalent bond –
Covalent compound –
Crest – The point on a wave with the maximum value or upward displacement within a cycle.
Crest factor –
Critical angle –
Critical mass – The smallest amount of fissile material needed for a sustained nuclear chain reaction.
Current density –
Curvilinear motion –
D[edit]
Dalton's law –
Damped vibration –
Damping –
Darcy–Weisbach equation –
Dark energy –
Dark matter –
DC motor – A mechanically commutated electric motor powered from direct current (DC).
Decibel –
Definite integral –
Deflection – The degree to which a structural element is displaced under a load. It may refer to an angle or a distance.
Deformation (engineering) –
Deformation (mechanics) –
Density – The mass density or density of a material is its mass per unit volume. Mathematically, density is defined as mass divided by volume.
Derivative –
Derived unit –
Destructive interference –
Dew point –
Dielectric –
Diffraction –
Dispersion –
Displacement (fluid) – Occurs when an object is immersed in a fluid, pushing it out of the way and taking its place. The volume of the fluid displaced can then be measured, and from this the volume of the immersed object can be deduced (the volume of the immersed object will be exactly equal to the volume of the displaced fluid).
Displacement (vector) – The shortest distance from the initial to the final position of a point. Thus, it is the length of an imaginary straight path, typically distinct from the path actually travelled by.
Distance – A numerical description of how far apart objects are.
Drift velocity –
Doppler effect – The change in frequency of a wave (or other periodic event) for an observer moving relative to its source.The received frequency is higher (compared to the emitted frequency) during the approach, it is identical at the instant of passing by, and it is lower during the recession.
Drag – Forces which act on a solid object in the direction of the relative fluid flow velocity. Unlike other resistive forces, such as dry friction, which is nearly independent of velocity, drag forces depend on velocity.
Ductility – A solid material's ability to deform under tensile stress; this is often characterized by the material's ability to be stretched into a wire.
Dynamics –
E[edit]
Econophysics –
Elastic collision –
Elastic energy –
Elastic instability –
Elastic modulus –
Elasticity – A physical property of materials which return to their original shape after they are deformed.
Electric charge – A physical property of matter that causes it to experience a force when near other electrically charged matter. There exist two types of electric charges, called positive and negative.
Electric circuit – An electrical network consisting of a closed loop, giving a return path for the current.
Electric current – A flow of electric charge through a conductive medium.
Electric displacement field –
Electric field – The region of space surrounding electrically charged particles and time-varying magnetic fields. The electric field depicts the force exerted on other electrically charged objects by the electrically charged particle the field is surrounding.
Electric field gradient –
Electric field intensity –
Electric generator –
Electric motor –
Electric potential –
Electrical conductor – A conductor is a material which contains movable electric charges, and therefore can conduct an electric current, under the influence of an electric field.
Electrical insulator – A material whose internal electric charges do not flow freely, and which therefore does not conduct an electric current, under the influence of an electric field.
Electrical potential energy –
Electric power – The rate at which electric energy is transferred by an electric circuit.
Electrical and electronics engineering –
Electrical network – An interconnection of electrical elements such as resistors, inductors, capacitors, voltage sources, current sources and switches.
Electrical resistance – The opposition to the passage of an electric current through an electrical element.
Electricity – The set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge.
'Electrochemical cell –
Electrodynamics –
Electrolytic cell –
Electromagnet – A type of magnet in which the magnetic field is produced by the flow of electric current.
Electromagnetic field – (also EMF or EM field) A physical field produced by moving electrically charged objects.
Electromagnetic induction –
Electromagnetic radiation – (EM radiation or EMR) Electromagnetic radiation is a form of energy emitted and absorbed by charged particles, which exhibits wave-like behavior as it travels through space.
Electromagnetic spectrum –
Electromagnetic wave equation –
Electromechanics –
Electromotive force –
Electron – A subatomic particle with a negative elementary electric charge.
Electron pair –
Electronvolt – (symbol eV) A unit of energy equal to approximately 1.6×10-19 joule (symbol J). By definition, it is the amount of energy gained by the charge of a single electron moved across an electric potential difference of one volt.
Electronegativity – A chemical property that describes the tendency of an atom or a functional group to attract electrons (or electron density) towards itself.
Electronics – A field that deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.
Elementary particle –
Emission spectrum –
Energy –The ability to do work
Endothermic - A process or reaction in which the system absorbs energy from its surroundings in the form of heat.
Engineering physics –
Entropy – a quantity which describes the randomness of a substance or system
Equipartition –
Escape velocity – The speed at which the kinetic energy plus the gravitational potential energy of an object is zero.[nb 1] It is the speed needed to "break free" from a gravitational field without further propulsion.
Exothermic – ("outside heating") A process or reaction that releases energy from the system, usually in the form of heat, but also in the form of light, electricity, or sound.
F[edit]
Farad –
Falling bodies – Objects that are moving towards a body with greater gravitational influence, such as a planet.
Faraday –
Faraday constant –
Fermat's principle –
Ferrimagnetism –
Ferromagnetism -
FIRST – An organization founded by inventor Dean Kamen in 1989 in order to develop ways to inspire students in engineering and technology fields
Fission– Either a nuclear reaction or a radioactive decay process in which the nucleus of an atom splits into smaller parts (lighter nuclei), often producing free neutrons and photons (in the form of gamma rays), and releasing a, relatively, very large amount of energy
Fluid –
Fluid mechanics –
Fluid physics –
Fluid statics –
Fluorescence –
Flux –
Focus –
Force –
Fraunhofer lines –
Frequency modulation –
'Free fall – Any motion of a body where its weight is the only force acting upon it.
Freezing point – The temperature at which a liquid changes state from to a solid.
Function –
Fundamental frequency –
Fundamental theorem of calculus–
Fusion– A nuclear reaction in which two or more atomic nuclei join together, or "fuse", to form a single heavier nucleus.
–
Gravitation – (or Gravity) A natural phenomenon by which physical bodies attract each other with a force proportional to their masses.
Gravitational constant – (denoted by G) A physical constant involved in the calculation(s) of gravitational force between two bodies. (Also known as 'the universal gravitational constant', or 'Newton's constant')
Gravitational energy – The potential energy associated with the gravitational field.
Gravitational field – A model used to explain the influence that a massive body extends into the space around itself, producing a force on another massive body. Thus, a gravitational field is used to explain gravitational phenomena, and is measured in newtons per kilogram (N/kg).
Gravitational potential – The gravitational potential at a location is equal to the work (energy transferred) per unit mass that is done by the force of gravity to move an object to a fixed reference location.
Gravitational waves -Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of spacetime that propagate as waves, generated in certain gravitational interactions and travelling outward from their source.
Gravity – (or gravitation) A natural phenomenon by which physical bodies attract each other with a force proportional to their masses.

Ion – An atom or molecule in which the total number of electrons is not equal to the total number of protons, giving the atom a net positive or negative electrical charge.
Ionic bond – A type of chemical bond formed through an electrostatic attraction between two oppositely charged ions.
Ionization – The process of converting an atom or molecule into an ion by adding or removing charged particles such as electrons or ions.
Isotope – Variants of a particular chemical element. While all isotopes of a given element share the same number of protons, each isotope differs from the others in its number of neutrons.
Kelvin – A unit of measurement for temperature. The Kelvin scale is an absolute, thermodynamic temperature scale using as its null point absolute zero.
Kinematics – The branch of classical mechanics that describes the motion of points, bodies (objects) and systems of bodies (groups of objects) without consideration of the causes of motion. The study of kinematics is often referred to as the geometry of motion.
Kirchhoff's circuit laws – Two approximate equalities that deal with the current and voltage in electrical circuits.also called Kirchhoff's rules or simply Kirchhoff's laws (see also Kirchhoff's laws for other meanings of that term).
Kirchhoff's equations – In fluid dynamics, the Kirchhoff equations describe the motion of a rigid body in an ideal fluid.
Lepton – An elementary particle which does not undergo strong interactions, but is subject to the Pauli exclusion principle. Two main classes of leptons exist: charged leptons (also known as the electron-like leptons), and neutral leptons (better known as neutrinos).
Lever – A machine consisting of a beam or rigid rod pivoted at a fixed hinge, or fulcrum.
Light – Visible light (commonly referred to simply as light) is electromagnetic radiation that is visible to the human eye, and is responsible for the sense of sight.
Linear actuator-- A form of motor that generates a linear movement directly.
Linear algebra – The branch of mathematics concerning vector spaces, often finite or countably infinite dimensional, as well as linear mappings between such spaces.
Linear elasticity – The mathematical study of how solid objects deform and become internally stressed due to prescribed loading conditions. Linear elasticity is a simplification of the more general nonlinear theory of elasticity and is a branch of continuum mechanics.
Liouville's Theorem - Phase space volume is conserved.
Liquid – A classical state of matter with a definite volume but no fixed shape.
Liquid crystal – (LCs) A matter in a state that has properties between those of conventional liquid and those of solid crystal. For instance, an LC may flow like a liquid, but its molecules may be oriented in a crystal-like way.

Machine – A powered tool consisting of one or more parts that is constructed to achieve a particular goal. Machines are usually powered by mechanical, chemical, thermal or electrical means, and are frequently motorised.
Machine element – Refers to an elementary component of a machine. consists of three basic types: structural components. mechanisms and control components
Maclaurin series – A representation of a function as an infinite sum of terms that are calculated from the values of the function's derivatives at a single point.
Magnetic field – A mathematical description of the magnetic influence of electric currents and magnetic materials. The magnetic field at any given point is specified by both a direction and a magnitude (or strength); as such it is a vector field.
Magnetism – A property of materials that respond to an applied magnetic field.
Mass balance – An application of conservation of mass to the analysis of physical systems, also called 'material balance'.
Mass density – A materials mass per unit volume, also just called density.
Mass flux – Is the rate of mass flow per unit area. The common symbols are j, J, f, or F, sometimes with subscript m to indicate mass is the flowing quantity. Its SI units are kg s-1 m-2.
Mass moment of inertia – A property of a distribution of mass in space that measures its resistance to rotational acceleration about an axis.
Mass number – The total number of protons and neutrons (together known as nucleons) in an atomic nucleus, also called atomic mass number or nucleon number.
Mass spectrometry –
Material properties –
Materials science –
Mathematical physics – "The application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods suitable for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories."
Mathematics – The abstract study of topics encompassing quantity, structure, space, change, and other properties; it has no generally accepted definition.
Matrix – A rectangular array of numbers, symbols, or expressions, arranged in rows and columns. The individual items in a matrix are called its elements or entries.
Matter – Generally considered to be a substance (often a particle) that has rest mass and (usually) also volume.
Maxwell's equations – A set of partial differential equations that, together with the Lorentz force law, form the foundation of classical electrodynamics, classical optics, and electric circuits.Maxwell's equations describe how electric and magnetic fields are generated and altered by each other and by charges and currents.
Mean – For a data set, the arithmetic mean is equal to the sum of the values divided by the number of values.
Measures of central tendency – A term which relates to the way in which quantitative data tend to cluster around some value. A measure of central tendency is any of a number of ways of specifying this "central value."
Mechanical filter –
Mechanical wave –
Mechanics – The branch of science concerned with the behaviour of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.
Median – In statistics and probability theory; the median of a finite list of numbers can be found by arranging all the observations from lowest value to highest value and picking the middle one. If there is an even number of observations the median is then usually defined to be the mean of the two middle values.
Melting – (or fusion) A physical process that results in the phase transition of a substance from a solid to a liquid.
Meson – Hadronic subatomic particles composed of one quark and one antiquark, bound together by the strong interaction.All mesons are unstable, with the longest-lived lasting for only a few hundredths of a microsecond.
Mode – The value that appears most often in a set of data.
Modulus of elasticity – The mathematical description of an object or substance's tendency to be deformed elastically (i.e., non-permanently) when a force is applied to it. The elastic modulus of an object is defined as the slope of its stress–strain curve in the elastic deformation region. As such, a stiffer material will have a higher elastic modulus.
Molality –
Molarity –
Molar concentration –
Molar mass – A physical property of matter. It is defined as the mass of a given substance divided by its amount of substance. The unit for molar mass is g/mol.
Molecule – An electrically neutral group of two or more atoms held together by covalent chemical bonds. Molecules are distinguished from ions by their lack of electrical charge.
Molecular physics – The study of the physical properties of molecules, the chemical bonds between atoms as well as the molecular dynamics.closely related to atomic physics and overlaps greatly with theoretical chemistry, physical chemistry and chemical physics.
Moment of inertia – A property of a distribution of mass in space that measures its resistance to rotational acceleration about an axis.
Nanoengineering – The practice of engineering on the nanoscale. Nanoengineering is largely a synonym for nanotechnology, but emphasizes the engineering rather than the pure science aspects of the field.
Nanotechnology – (sometimes shortened to "nanotech") The manipulation of matter on an atomic and molecular scale. A more generalized description of nanotechnology is 'the manipulation of matter with at least one dimension sized from 1 to 100 nanometers'.
Navier–Stokes equations –
Neurophysics –
Neutrino – An electrically neutral subatomic particle. The neutrino is denoted by the Greek letter ? (nu). All evidence suggests that neutrinos have mass but that their mass is tiny even by the standards of subatomic particles. Their mass has never been measured accurately.
Newton's laws of motion – The three physical laws that form the basis for classical mechanics. They describe the relationship between the forces acting on a body and its motion due to those forces.
Ohm – The SI derived unit of electrical resistance.
Ohm's law – States that the current through a conductor between two points is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two points.
Optics – The branch of physics which involves the behaviour and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it. Optics usually describes the behaviour of visible, ultraviolet, and infrared light, however, Because light is an electromagnetic wave, other forms of electromagnetic radiation such as X-rays, microwaves, and radio waves exhibit similar properties.
Particle physics – A branch of physics which studies the nature of particles that are the constituents of what is usually referred to as matter and radiation.
Pascal's Law – A principle in fluid mechanics that states that pressure exerted anywhere in a confined incompressible fluid is transmitted equally in all directions throughout the fluid such that the pressure variations (initial differences) remain the same.
Pendulum –
Periodic table – A tabular display of the chemical elements, organised on the basis of their atomic numbers, electron configurations, and recurring chemical properties. Elements are presented in order of increasing atomic number (number of protons).
pH – A measure used to describe whether a liquid is acidic or basic (or alkaline).
Photon – An elementary particle, the quantum of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation, and the force carrier for the electromagnetic force.
Physical chemistry – The study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of laws and concepts of physics.
Physical quantity –
Physics – The natural science that involves the study of matter and its motion through space and time, along with related concepts such as energy and force. More broadly, it is the general analysis of nature, conducted in order to understand how the universe behaves.
Planck constant – (denoted h, also called Planck's constant) A physical constant that is the quantum of action in quantum mechanics.
Quantum electrodynamics – The relativistic quantum field theory of electrodynamics. In essence, it describes how light and matter interact and is the first theory where full agreement between quantum mechanics and special relativity is achieved. QED mathematically describes all phenomena involving electrically charged particles interacting by means of exchange of photons and represents the quantum counterpart of classical electromagnetism giving a complete account of matter and light interaction.
Quantum field theory – A theoretical framework for constructing quantum mechanical models of subatomic particles in particle physics and quasiparticles in condensed matter physics
Quantum mechanics – A branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena at microscopic scales, where the action is on the order of the Planck constant. Quantum mechanics departs from classical mechanics primarily at the quantum realm of atomic and subatomic length scales. Quantum mechanics provides a mathematical description of much of the dual particle-like and wave-like behavior and interactions of energy and matter.
Rigid body – An idealization of a solid body in which deformation is neglected. In other words, the distance between any two given points of a rigid body remains constant in time regardless of external forces exerted on it. Even though such an object cannot physically exist due to relativity, objects can normally be assumed to be perfectly rigid if they are not moving near the speed of light.
Roche limit – (also Roche radius) The distance within which a celestial body, held together only by its own gravity, will disintegrate due to a second celestial body's tidal forces exceeding the first body's gravitational self-attraction. Inside the Roche limit, orbiting material will tend to disperse and form rings, while outside the limit, material will tend to coalesce.
Rotational energy – (or angular kinetic energy) The kinetic energy due to the rotation of an object and forms part of its total kinetic energy.
Rotational speed – (also speed of revolution) The number of complete rotations or revolutions a rotating body makes per time unit
Scalar (physics) – A scalar is a simple physical quantity that is unchanged by coordinate system rotations or translations (in Newtonian mechanics), or by Lorentz transformations or central-time translations (in relativity). A scalar is a quantity that can be described by a single number, unlike vectors, tensors, etc. which are described by several numbers which describe magnitude and direction.
Scattering – A general physical process where some forms of radiation, such as light, sound, or moving particles, are forced to deviate from a straight trajectory by one or more localised non-uniformities in the medium through which they pass.
Science – A systematic enterprise that builds and organises knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.
Screw – A mechanism that converts rotational motion to linear motion, and a torque (rotational force) to a linear force.
Simple harmonic motion –
Simple machine – A mechanical device that changes the direction or magnitude of a force.[2] In general, they can be defined as the simplest mechanisms that provide mechanical advantage (also called leverage).
Siphon – A tube in an inverted U shape that causes a liquid to flow uphill without pumps, powered by the fall of the liquid as it flows down the tube under the pull of gravity. May more generally refer to a wide variety of devices that involve the flow of liquids through tubes.
Snell's law –
Solar cell –
Solid mechanics –
Solid-state physics –
Solubility – The property of a solid, liquid, or gaseous chemical substance called solute to dissolve in a solid, liquid, or gaseous solvent to form a homogeneous solution of the solute in the solvent. The solubility of a substance fundamentally depends on the used solvent as well as on temperature and pressure.
Sound – A mechanical wave that is an oscillation of pressure transmitted through a solid, liquid, or gas, composed of frequencies within the range of hearing.
Special relativity –
Speed of light – The speed of light in vacuum, commonly denoted c, is a universal physical constant important in many areas of physics. Its value is 299,792,458 metres per second, a figure that is exact because the length of the metre is defined from this constant and the international standard for time.
Spin quantum number –
Standard atomic weight –
Standard Model –
State of matter –
Statics – The branch of mechanics that is concerned with the analysis of loads (force and torque, or "moment") on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.
Statistics – The study of the collection, organisation, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data. It deals with all aspects of this, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments.
Stiffness – The rigidity of an object — the extent to which it resists deformation in response to an applied force.
Strain – The transformation of a body from a reference configuration to a current configuration.[1] A configuration is a set containing the positions of all particles of the body.
Strain hardening –
Strength of materials –
Stress – (1) An applied force or system of forces that tends to strain or deform a body. (2) A measure of the internal forces acting within a deformable body. (3) A quantitative measure of the average force per unit area of a surface within a body on which internal forces act.
Torque – (also moment or moment of force), is the tendency of a force to rotate an object about an axis, fulcrum, or pivot. Just as a force is a push or a pull, a torque can be thought of as a twist to an object.
Total internal reflection –
Toughness – The ability of a material to absorb energy and plastically deform without fracturing;[1] Material toughness is defined as the amount of energy per volume that a material can absorb before rupturing. It is also defined as the resistance to fracture of a material when stressed.
Trajectory – The path that a moving object follows through space as a function of time.
Wavelength – The wavelength of a sinusoidal wave is the spatial period of the wave—the distance over which the wave's shape repeats.
Weak interaction – Weak interaction (also weak force/weak nuclear force) is one of the four fundamental forces of nature, alongside the strong nuclear force, electromagnetism, and gravitation. It is responsible for the radioactive decay of subatomic particles and initiates the process known as hydrogen fusion in stars.
Weber –
Wedge – A triangular shaped round tool, a compound and portable inclined plane, and one of the six classical simple machines.
Wheel and axle – One of six simple machines identified by Renaissance scientists drawing from Greek texts on technology. The wheel and axle is generally considered to be a wheel attached to an axle so that these two parts rotate together in which a force is transferred from one to the other.
White dwarf – (also degenerate dwarf) A stellar remnant composed mostly of electron-degenerate matter. They are very dense; a white dwarf's mass is comparable to that of the Sun and its volume is comparable to that of the Earth. Its faint luminosity comes from the emission of stored thermal energy.
Wind – The flow of gases on a large scale.
Wind shear – (sometimes called wind gradient) A difference in wind speed and direction over a relatively short distance in the atmosphere. Wind shear can be broken down into vertical and horizontal components, with horizontal wind shear seen across fronts and near the coast, and vertical shear typically near the surface, though also at higher levels in the atmosphere.
